 
 
 
 
 
Status Report  
by the 
Nunez Independent 
Monitor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 11, 2025  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 1 of 19
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T
HE NUNEZ MONITORING TEAM 
 
Steve J. Martin 
Monitor 
Elly Davis 
Junior Analyst 
Kelly Dedel, Ph.D. 
Subject Matter Expert 
Anna E. Friedberg 
Deputy Monitor 
Dennis O. Gonzalez 
Director 
Patrick Hurley 
Subject Matter Expert 
Alycia M. Karlovich 
Associate  
Emmitt Sparkman 
Subject Matter Expert 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 2 of 19
i 
Table of Contents 
Introduction........................................................................................................................ 1 
Background ............................................................................................................................... 1 
Considerations for Appointing a Remediation Manager ............................................... 3 
Overarching Considerations for Remedial Relief ..................................................................... 4 
Structural Aspects of Remedial Relief ...................................................................................... 5 
Key Objectives for the Remediation Manager’s work ............................................................. 7 
Practical Considerations for Appointment of Remediation Manager ....................................... 8 
Update on Receiverships In Other Jails and Prisons ................................................................ 9 
Update on Remediation Manager Candidates & Proposed Remediation Manager 
Order ................................................................................................................................. 11 
Remediation Manager Candidates .......................................................................................... 11 
Proposed Remediation Manager Order ................................................................................... 12 
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 15 
Appendix A – Monitor’s Submission 
Exhibit A: Comprehensive Chart of Objections and Proposals 
Exhibit B: Clean version of the Court’s Proposed Order reflecting the changes 
proposed by the Monitoring Team and any additional changes in which the Parties 
consent/do not object  
Appendix B – Defendants’ Submission 
Defendants’ Memorandum in Support of Proposed Chases to Remediation 
Manager Proposed Order 
Defendants’ Supplemental Memorandum in Support of Objections and Requested 
Changes to the Proposed Order Regarding the Remediation Manager 
o Appendix A: Redlined version of the Court’s Proposed Order reflecting the 
changes proposed or consented to by the Defendants  
o Appendix B: Clean version of the Court’s Proposed Order reflecting the 
changes proposed or consented to by the Defendants 
Appendix C – Plaintiffs’ Counsel Submission 
Plaintiffs’ Memorandum of Law Concerning Proposed Changes to Remediation 
Manager Proposed Order  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 3 of 19
ii 
o Exhibit A: Redlined version of the Court’s Proposed Order reflecting the 
changes proposed by the Plaintiff Class, jointly with the Southern District 
of New York  
o Exhibit B: Clean version of the Court’s Proposed Order reflecting the 
changes proposed by the Plaintiff Class, jointly with the Southern District 
of New York 
o Exhibit C: Department of Correction Organization Chart as of June 3, 2025 
Appendix D – Updated Summary Chart of Receivership Cases 
 
Appendix E – Excerpts of Provisions Regarding Termination of Receivership 
Authority from Other Correctional Receivership Orders 
 
Appendix F – Updated Index of Court Filings cited in the Receivership Charts 
 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 4 of 19
1 
INTRODUCTION 
This is the second report by the Monitoring Team regarding remedial relief related to the 
motion for contempt. 
BACKGROUND 
The litigation regarding the motion for contempt was initiated on August 10, 2023 when 
the Court granted Plaintiffs’ Counsel’s application to move for contempt regarding 18 provisions 
of the Nunez Court Orders (“the Contempt Provisions”). Counsel for the Plaintiff Class and the 
Southern District of New York (“SDNY”) filed their initial briefs on November 17, 2023 (dkts. 
601 to 610). The motions were fully briefed on May 30, 2024. Following several meet and 
confers convened by the Monitoring Team, the Parties each filed a revised Statement of Facts 
and Plaintiffs’ Counsel filed a Supplemental Statement of Facts on July 30, 2024 (dkts. 762 to 
764). On September 25, 2024, the Court held oral arguments.  The Court then directed the 
Monitoring Team and the Parties to meet and confer regarding remedial relief proposals.  On 
November 26, 2024, the Court issued an Order of Contempt and again directed the Parties to 
meet and confer regarding remedial relief proposals (dkt. 803). The Monitoring Team and the 
Parties engaged in extensive discussions between September 2024 and January 2025.  On 
January 24, 2025, the Monitor issued a report that included separate submissions from the 
Defendants and the Plaintiff Class and the SDNY regarding proposals to the Court for remedial 
relief (dkt. 811). The Parties made a number of subsequent filings in support of their proposals 
and in response to each other’s proposals. Other filings by amici, responses to those submissions 
and additional submissions by Defendants and the Plaintiff Class and SDNY were made prior to 
the Court’s issuance of the May 13, 2025 Order.  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 5 of 19
2 
On May 13, 2025 the Court issued an order regarding the remedial relief to address the 
Court’s finding of contempt (dkt. 846). In the May 13, 2025 Order, the Court explained it “has 
fashioned a remedy designed to ameliorate Defendants’ contempt by empowering a skilled 
outside professional (the ‘Nunez Remediation Manager’) to develop a phased action plan 
specifically focused on the areas in which the Court has found Defendants to be in contempt and, 
subject only to the Court’s authority and the provisions of the orders entered in this case, to direct 
the implementation of that plan in collaboration with the Commissioner, who will retain primary 
responsibility and authority for achieving compliance with the remaining unsatisfied 
requirements of the Nunez Court Orders.”  See May 13, 2025 Order at pg. 35. The Commissioner 
will retain primary responsibility and authority for achieving Substantial Compliance with the 
hundreds of other provisions of the Nunez Court Orders. 
This report provides a summary of the recent meet and confers among the Parties, along 
with commentary from the Monitoring Team. Detailed Appendices contain proposals for the 
Court’s Remediation Manager Order, Memoranda of Law from Defendants and the Plaintiff 
Class, along with an updated Summary of Receiverships.  
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 6 of 19
3 
CONSIDERATIONS FOR APPOINTING A REMEDIATION MANAGER 
The Monitoring Team has been working with the stakeholders in this case for almost a 
year regarding the proposed remedial relief.  That work has been guided by the Monitoring 
Team’s significant expertise in the Department’s operations and compliance with the Nunez 
Court Orders, as well as the Monitoring Team’s expertise in other confinement systems across 
the country.  The Monitoring Team has also worked to better understand remedial relief that has 
been imposed in other systems in order to learn how aspects of those models could possibly be 
utilized in this system.   
The Monitoring Team certainly supports and embraces the Court’s findings that it must 
“identify[. . . ] a form of remedy that will achieve rapid change in the safety profile of Rikers 
Island and compliance with Court orders.” Dkt. 803 at pg. 53.  In an effort to develop the best 
possible model for relief that addresses the Court’s objectives and fits the contours of the 
intractable problems facing the Department, the Monitoring Team developed the following 
framework for consideration. This framework informs the Monitoring Team’s recommendations 
for the Court’s potential selection of the Remediation Manager and the Court’s Order governing 
the Remediation Manager’s work in four key areas, which are explained in more detail in the 
narrative that follows: 
• Overarching considerations for remedial relief; 
• Structural aspects of remedial relief; 
• Key objectives for the Remediation Manager’s work; and  
• Practical considerations for the interface between the Remediation Manager’s 
work, the Department and the Monitoring Team.     
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 7 of 19
4 
OVERARCHING CONSIDERATIONS FOR REMEDIAL RELIEF  
The imposition of a Receiver (or Remediation Manager, in this case) is an extreme and 
rarely used remedy to address dangerous and intractable conditions of confinement in jails and 
prisons.1 Given the combination of long-standing, complex problems in confinement facilities 
and the infrequent application of this approach, evidence regarding the effectiveness and 
sustainability of the solutions devised by other correctional receivers is mixed, largely anecdotal 
and context-specific. The overarching goal for the Remediation Manager must be to improve the 
jails’ conditions, but “if the government can’t plausibly maintain a receiver’s gains, the 
mechanism defeats itself, perpetuating a vicious cycle of backsliding, neglect, and litigation.”2 It 
is for these reasons the Court has carefully crafted a remedy to establish clear parameters of 
authority, identified specific goals and expectations, and reinforced the importance of 
implementing sustainable reforms that can be maintained by the City to ensure that control of the 
jails is returned to the City as quickly and sustainably as possible. 
The Remediation Manager must establish and institutionalize the Department’s internal 
capacity to operate in a manner that meets requirements of the eighteen contempt provisions. In 
other words, the Office of the Remediation Manager itself must not become another entrenched 
obstacle that further complicates the extant labyrinth of issues. Bureaucratic hurdles have long 
been reported as obstacles to reform, and it would be counterproductive to create a Remediation 
Manager structure that propagates additional layers of officialdom. To be certain, significant 
resources will be needed to advance the reform effort, but they must be deployed thoughtfully 
 
1 Southall, A. (2024, November 29). Can a court’s ‘last resort’ fix New York City’s jails? The New York Times. 
https://www.nytimes.com/2024/11/29/nyregion/rikers-receivership.html?smid=nytcore-ios-
share&referringSource=articleShare  
2 Stroud, H. (2025, August 13). What’s next in the federal court takeover of Rikers Island? Brennan Center for 
Justice. https://www.brennancenter.org/our-work/analysis-opinion/whats-next-federal-court-takeover-rikers-
island#:~:text=Imagine%20a%20receiver%20manages%20to,the%20jails%20confirms%20the%20point. 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 8 of 19
5 
and critically, and with almost surgical precision, focused on implementing improved practices 
by the Department’s own operators and addressing obstacles to compliance with independent 
sustainability by the Department always at the forefront. It is critical for members of the 
Remediation Manager’s team to be selected based on their ability to build the Department’s 
internal, institutional capacity to independently operate a safe jail system. For that reason, we 
recommend that the Remediation Manager Team must consist of members with bona fide 
credentials in sound correctional practice and in stimulating the type of culture change needed 
for the Department to improve practice and sustain progress.   
STRUCTURAL ASPECTS OF REMEDIAL RELIEF 
 The Monitoring Team has summarized the Court ’s stated goals for the Remediation 
Manager, along with a brief explanation of the value these goals bring to the reform effort.  
1. Direct Court Oversight: The structure must provide for direct Court oversight of the 
Remediation Manager’s work with respect to Nunez requirements for use of force and 
safety.3 
2. Qualities of the Remediation Manager: The individual selected to be the Remediation 
Manager must have proven and relevant expertise in sound correctional management and 
operations and the core competence to catalyze the culture change necessary to achieve 
the Court’s mandate to bring the Department into compliance with the Contempt 
Provisions.  
3. Return to Local Control. The Court emphasized the mandate to restore local control 
over the jails’ management by the City and Department as quickly as possible. This 
 
3 To be clear, direct Court authority would not contemplate granular, day-to-day input from the Court. 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 9 of 19
6 
mandate requires the Remediation Manager to focus on developing in the Department an 
institutionalized capacity to maintain the reforms independently of external actors. This is 
evident in the requirements for the Remediation Manager to identify and implement 
several interconnected strategies, including: 
a. Strategies centered on collaboration with the Department’s own leadership and 
functions. 
b. A framework for operating the Office of the Remediation Manager that optimizes 
existing structures and functions and that minimizes additional bureaucracy and 
expense. 
c. A specific plan to transition full authority over the jails back to Defendants as 
quickly as possible. 
4. Sustainable Initiatives: Transformational, durable change in the Department’s practices 
can only be accomplished by careful, wise utilization of existing Departmental assets, and 
building new, internal assets that are necessary to achieve a constitutionally adequate 
level of safety. The Court explained that the Remediation Manager must, throughout their 
tenure, focus their attention on sustainable strategies that will enable Defendants to regain 
control of jail governance while maintaining the necessary level of transformation. 
5. Collaborating with and Leveraging the Monitoring Team’s Expertise: The 
Remediation Manager will have a significant learning curve. To that end, the 
Remediation Manager will need to leverage the Monitoring Team’s resources and 
knowledge gained through its long-term engagement with the Department as a way to 
understand how the Department operates, its challenges, and its previous efforts to 
achieve compliance with the Contempt Provisions, as well as the reasons those efforts 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 10 of 19
7 
were not successful. The roles of the Monitoring Team and the Remediation Manager 
must be complimentary and not duplicative. The Remediation Manager must be focused 
on how to implement and operationalize reforms necessary to achieve compliance with 
the Contempt Provisions.  The Monitoring Team will function as a resource and will 
continue to provide neutral and independent assessments of the jails’ operations and the 
status of compliance with the Nunez Court Orders, including the Contempt Provisions.   
6. Decisive Action: The Remediation Manager must be willing and able to address any 
potential obstacles that inhibit or impede compliance with the Contempt Provisions, 
regardless of how politically challenging or unpopular the decisions may be with various 
stakeholders. Whenever possible, working within existing, functional structures and 
parameters is preferred; however, at times, new approaches will be needed to resolve 
long-standing obstacles to reform and additional relief from the Court may have to be 
sought when necessary. Many of these decisions may be unpopular with various 
stakeholders, and the Remediation Manager and Department leadership must remain 
steadfast in the face of strong and persistent opposition or pressure from stakeholders. 
They must have the fortitude to engage with various constituencies, make tough 
decisions, and take firm action when required. This will likely include identifying and 
taking appropriate steps to make necessary changes to policies, contracts, regulations, or 
other impediments to achieving compliance with the Contempt Provisions. 
KEY OBJECTIVES FOR THE REMEDIATION MANAGER’S WORK 
The Court emphasized in its May 13, 2025 Order that the overarching goal of the 
Remediation Manager is for the Department to achieve Substantial Compliance with the 18 
Contempt Provisions. To that end, the Court explained that this will require: “address[ing] the 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 11 of 19
8 
key issues that have blocked compliance with the Consent Judgment and subsequent Court 
Orders, [namely]:  
• insufficiently resourced leadership,  
• a lack of continuity in management,  
• failures of supervision and cooperation between supervisors and line officers,  
• a lack of skill or imagination to create and implement transformative plans,  
• and an unwillingness or inability to cooperate with Monitoring Team 
recommendations to accomplish the urgently necessary changes in the safety 
profile of the jails.” 
The Monitoring Team emphasizes that addressing intractable problems related to staff 
deployment and staff competency must also be essential objectives for the Remediation 
Manager’s work.  
PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR APPOINTMENT OF REMEDIATION MANAGER 
The Remediation Manager will have a steep learning curve while under significant 
pressure to begin the difficult work of ameliorating the dangerous conditions in the jails.  The 
Contempt Provisions clearly identify what must be done, but the critical issue is how the 
Department’s practices can be changed. It is critical for the Remediation Manager to first and 
simultaneously develop the necessary relationships with those working in the Department and 
Monitoring Team while also developing an understanding of the Department’s operation, the 
reasons the Department was found to be in contempt with the 18 provisions, and the various 
challenges that have inhibited the implementation of the Court’s requirements for these 18 
provisions.   
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 12 of 19
9 
The appointment of a Remediation Manager will indisputably impact the Department’s 
operations and the work of the Monitoring Team. First, strategies for introducing the 
Remediation Manager to the Department’s leadership and key divisions, facilities and their 
leadership, staff, and the Monitoring Team are needed to ensure that the Remediation Manager 
can begin to build relationships, identify existing assets and develop a perspective on how to best 
leverage those assets. In doing so, the Monitoring Team may also serve as a resource to provide 
critical context and information about attempts to prior efforts to implement reforms, obstacles to 
those initiatives, and lessons learned that will help the Remediation Manager avoid repeating 
past mistakes and target efforts more effectively. In addition, many logistical issues will need to 
be addressed including office space, communication strategies, and a process for requesting and 
receiving information, among others. Both the Department and the Monitoring Team will need to 
reconfigure their own operations to incorporate and accommodate the Remediation Manager, 
which will require them to deploy resources to support the Remediation Manager and to 
accelerate the Remediation Manager’s learning curve, all while maintaining legacy operations 
and fulfilling existing responsibilities. As the Remediation Manager begins to develop new 
strategies, a process for collaborating with the Department at various levels and incorporating 
feedback from the Monitoring Team will be essential to ensure that all stakeholders are well-
informed and able to contribute to the development of viable and sustainable approaches to 
pursuing compliance with the Contempt Provisions.   
UPDATE ON RECEIVERSHIPS IN OTHER JAILS AND PRISONS 
The Monitoring Team previously provided the Court with a detailed summary of the nine 
cases in which a Receiver has been appointed in a jail or prison context. The Court may benefit 
from information about two developments that have since occurred. In particular, a Receiver was 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 13 of 19
10 
appointed in another case (Coleman) and a Receiver has been officially appointed in Hinds 
County (the case had previously been stayed subject to an appeal).  The materials regarding 
receivership in other jurisdictions have thus been updated and are included in Appendices D and 
F.  Further, given the significant discussion amongst the Parties regarding the potential 
termination of the Remediation Manager’s authority, the Monitoring Team has pulled the 
relevant excerpts from the other jurisdictions on how the termination proposals occurred in those 
matters in Appendix E. 
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 14 of 19
11 
UPDATE ON REMEDIATION MANAGER CANDIDATES & PROPOSED REMEDIATION 
MANAGER ORDER  
The Monitoring Team and the Parties have been actively engaged in various meet and 
confers regarding proposed remedial relief since September 2024. Most recently, since May 
2025, the Monitoring Team has engaged the Parties in frequent communications, numerous 
group meetings among all Parties and the Monitoring Team, and separate meetings between the 
Monitoring Team and individual Parties regarding the Remediation Manager candidates and the 
Court’s proposed remediation manager order.  
REMEDIATION MANAGER CANDIDATES 
With respect to candidates to serve as the Remediation Manager, the Monitoring Team 
and the Parties evaluated almost 30 confidential applications for the Remediation Manager 
position that were submitted to the Court. The Monitoring Team and the Parties carefully 
scrutinized the applications, and the Parties reported interviewing numerous potential candidates 
and checking the references of those candidates. The Monitoring Team supported the process by 
helping develop a process for evaluating the applications and facilitating engagement among the 
Parties. The Monitoring Team frequently communicated with and convened meetings among the 
Parties regarding the process for assessing the applications, discussing the applicants and 
ultimately, recommending specific candidates to the Court.  
On August 29, 2025, the Monitoring Team submitted a confidential, in camera report to 
the Court that included submissions from counsel for the Plaintiff Class, the Southern District of 
New York, and Defendants containing their recommended candidates for the Remediation 
Manager. In its May 13, 2025 Order, the Court explained that “[o]nce the Court has received the 
parties’ recommendations, the Court may interview the proposed candidates and any others it 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 15 of 19
12 
deems appropriate to review, and the Court shall select the Nunez Remediation Manager. It is 
necessary for the Court to have ultimate control over the selection of the Nunez Remediation 
Manager in order to correct the violation of federal rights, as identified in the Contempt Order 
and Opinion, because, ultimately, the Receiver will be an agent of and answer only to the Court.”  
See the Court’s May 13, 2025 Order at pg. 47. 
PROPOSED REMEDIATION MANAGER ORDER 
The Monitoring Team has facilitated extensive negotiations regarding the Court’s 
proposed Remediation Manager Order and has compiled objections and alternative proposals for 
the Court’s consideration. In an effort to condense the issues for the Court’s consideration, the 
Monitoring Team attempted to distill the issues such that areas of agreement could be easily 
identified and matters under dispute could be clearly articulated.  
The complex issues under evaluation, along with the significant number of individuals 
representing the stakeholders who have many different perspectives, required significant 
coordination by the Monitoring Team and frequent engagement and back and forth with the 
stakeholders’ representatives. In particular, during the past month, the Monitoring Team and the 
Parties have communicated nearly daily about these issues. Each of the entities participated fully 
in the process, made good faith efforts to find areas of agreement, and provided specific 
suggestions and a thoughtful rationale for their proposed changes. The sheer number of 
provisions being negotiated made this a cumbersome process, but the Parties’ tenacity and 
responsiveness were essential components to developing a comprehensive submission to the 
Court. The supplemental materials attached to this report are designed to show each Party’s 
position on proposed edits and any remaining objections or issues. These materials include:  
• Appendix A – Monitor’s Submission 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 16 of 19
13 
o Exhibit A: Comprehensive Chart of Objections and Proposals: This chart lists 
each provision of the Order, whether any changes to the Court’s language have 
been proposed, and the extent to which agreement has been achieved. For each 
provision there is a brief summary explaining the proposals, along with relevant 
explanations and other information from the Monitoring Team, Defendants, and 
counsel for the Plaintiff Class and SDNY as necessary, depending on the proposal. 
o Exhibit B: Clean version of the Court’s Proposed Order reflecting the changes 
proposed by the Monitoring Team and any additional changes in which the Parties 
consent/do not object to. 
• Appendix B – Defendants’ Submission 
o Defendants’ Memorandum in Support of Proposed Chases to Remediation 
Manager Proposed Order  
o Defendants’ Supplemental Memorandum in Support of Objections and Requested 
Changes to the Proposed Order Regarding the Remediation Manager 
 Appendix A: Redlined version of the Court’s Proposed Order reflecting the 
changes proposed or consented to by the Defendants  
 Appendix B: Clean version of the Court’s Proposed Order reflecting the 
changes proposed or consented to by the Defendants 
• Appendix C – Plaintiffs’ Counsel Submission 
o Plaintiffs’ Memorandum of Law Concerning Proposed Changes to Remediation 
Manager Proposed Order  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 17 of 19
14 
 Exhibit A: Redlined version of the Court’s Proposed Order reflecting the 
changes proposed by the Plaintiff Class, jointly with the Southern District 
of New York  
 Exhibit B: Clean version of the Court’s Proposed Order reflecting the 
changes proposed by the Plaintiff Class, jointly with the Southern District 
of New York 
 Exhibit C: Department of Correction Organization Chart as of June 3, 
2025 
In addition to the issues requiring resolution identified in the Comprehensive Chart, there 
is one provision related to information sharing that is still being negotiated among the Parties. 
The Monitoring Team recommends that the Court permit the Monitoring Team to provide a 
submission on September 24, 2025 with the outcome of those discussions.  
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 18 of 19
15 
CONCLUSION 
The Department of Correction remains in a state of flux.  A significant number of urgent 
and time-sensitive issues directly related to the jails’ elevated risk of harm continue to be at the 
forefront of the Monitoring Team’s work but are present against a backdrop of significant 
uncertainty. A number of decisions to be made in the coming months will chart the path forward 
for the Department. The Defendants’ Motion for Reconsideration is fully briefed and requires 
resolution by the Court. That motion, at least in part, overlaps with the detailed objections to the 
proposed Order regarding the Remediation Manager addressed in this report and which the Court 
must also resolve. Upon resolution of these motions and objections/proposals, the Court may 
choose to appoint a Remediation Manager. The upcoming City elections in November 2025 also 
add an additional level of uncertainty. Despite these many unknowns, addressing the safety and 
security of the jails and working to ameliorate the risk of harm must remain at the forefront of 
the work.  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906     Filed 09/11/25     Page 19 of 19
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX A 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 1 of 73
1 
Comprehensive Chart of Objections and Proposed Revisions by Defendants, Plaintiff Class/SDNY and the Monitoring Team 
 
WHEREAS Clauses 
 
Overarching Global Edits – we note the following global edits regarding Order: 
Capitalize Benchmarks 
Define Remediation Manager Team and replace Nunez Remediation Manager with Team as necessary 
Definition of Acceptance Effective Date/Start Date/Authority Date (depending on outcome of Court’ s decisions) 
Capitalize Substantial Compliance 
Capitalize Contempt Provisions 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff’s Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
WHEREAS Clause, Page 
1 
in this matter to correct the violations of the 
constitutional rights of people incarcerated in jails 
operated by the New York City Department of 
Correction 
in this matter to correct the violations of the constitutional 
rights of people incarcerated in jails operated by the New 
York City Department of Correction 
 
in this matter to correct the violationsviolation of the 
constitutional rights of people incarcerated in jails 
operated by the New York City Department of 
Correction 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection by the Parties and Monitoring Team to the proposed revisions. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
WHEREAS Clause, Page 
2 the Nunez Independent Monitor (the “Monitor”)   
the Nunez Independent Monitor (the “Monitor” or 
“Monitoring Team,” which shall each refer to the 
Monitor and members of the Monitoring Team) 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection by the Parties and Monitoring Team to the proposed revisions. 
 
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 2 of 73
2 
Section I: Appointment of Nunez Remediation Manager and Nunez Remediation Manager’s Duties 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ I, ¶ A 
 
Appointment of Nunez 
Remediation Manager and 
Nunez Remediation 
Manager’s Duties 
[NAME] is here by appointed to serve in this case as 
Nunez Remediation Manager, with the responsibility and 
authority to take all necessary steps to promptly achieve 
Substantial Compliance (defined in Section XX, ¶ 18 of 
the Consent Judgment) with the Contempt Provisions. 
  
[NAME] is here byhereby appointed to serve in this 
case as Nunez Remediation Manager, with the 
responsibility and authority to take all necessary 
steps to promptly achieve Substantial Compliance 
(defined in Section XX, ¶ 18 of the Consent 
Judgment) with the Contempt Provisions. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection by the Parties and Monitoring Team to the proposed revisions. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ I, ¶ B 
 
Appointment of Nunez 
Remediation Manager and 
Nunez Remediation 
Manager’s Duties 
The Nunez Remediation Manager’s work shall be 
guided by benchmarks identified in the “Remediation 
Action Plan,” a work plan designed to achieve 
Substantial Compliance with the Contempt Provisions 
within three years of the date the Court files the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s Acceptance of this appointment 
on the public docket for this case (“Acceptance Effective 
Date”), subject to extension of the target period for any 
particular elements of the plan upon a showing of good 
cause therefor.  The process to determine the substance 
of the Remediation Action Plan is detailed in Section 
II.A. 
  
The Nunez Remediation Manager’s work shall be 
guided by benchmarks identified in the “Remediation 
Action Plan,” a work plan that includes specific and 
concrete steps and milestones designed to achieve 
Substantial Compliance with the Contempt Provisions 
within three years of the date the Court files the 
Nunez Remediation Manager’s Acceptance of this 
appointment on the public docket for this case 
(“Acceptance Effective Date”), subject to extension of 
the target period for any particular elements of the 
plan upon a showing of good cause therefor..  The 
process to determine the substance of the Remediation 
Action Plan is detailed in Section II.A. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection by the Parties and Monitoring Team to the proposed revisions. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team recommends all requirements related to the Remediation Action Plan (“RAP”) are addressed in § II for clarity.  We recommend removal of the timing of the RAP here because that is also addressed in § II, ¶ 
A, ii and it is confusing, potentially unclear and possibly conflicting to have two different provisions (worded slightly differently) to address the timing and content of the RAP.  Further, the language regarding the change to any timing of the RAP will also be 
addressed in § II, ¶ A below. 
 
Defendants’ Position: No objection. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: No objection.  
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ I, ¶ C 
 
Appointment of Nunez 
Remediation Manager and 
Nunez Remediation 
Manager’s Duties 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall provide 
leadership and executive management with the goal of 
developing and implementing a sustainable system that 
protects the constitutional rights of incarcerated people. 
  
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall provide 
leadership and executive management with respect to 
achieving Substantial Compliance with the Contempt 
Provisions with the goal of developing and 
implementing a sustainable system that protects the 
constitutional rights of incarcerated people. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: The Defendants do not object to the Monitor’s recommendation, but the Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose and contend the language should remain as drafted by the Court so no changes are necessary. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitor recommendation is made in response to the feedback from Defendants. In light of the Court’s May 13, 2025 Order, the proposal from Defendants to include a reference to the Contempt Provisions appears reasonable 
and consistent with the Court’s decision that the RM’s authority is related to achieving compliance with the Contempt Provisions.   
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendant do not object to the language proposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY below for the reasons set out in Defendants’ Memorandum of Law in Support of Objections and Proposed Changes, Dated July 9, 2025 (“Defs. Objs.”), SECTIONS I & II: 
Remediation Action Plan and Benchmarks on pgs. 3-4.   
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 3 of 73
3 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. We think the Court’s original language was clear, and the scope of the Remediation Manager’s authority is clearly defined elsewhere. Including this additional language on that topic here is both unnecessary and 
confusing. However, if the Court thinks some additional language is appropriate, we do not object to this construction, which we proposed during this revision process as an alternative should the Court adopt language to this effect. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ I, ¶ D 
 
Appointment of Nunez 
Remediation Manager and 
Nunez Remediation 
Manager’s Duties 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall be answerable 
only to the Court.    
No proposed revisions or objections. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in  
§ I 
 
Appointment of Nunez 
Remediation Manager and 
Nunez Remediation 
Manager’s Duties 
   
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall maintain an 
office within Department headquarters or on Rikers 
Island and shall  
[Monitor Proposal: be onsite with sufficient 
frequency, regularity, and duration to carry out their 
duties.] 
 
[Defendants’ Proposal: not work remotely more 
than two business days per week.] 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Consent/no objection to the language in the first part of the sentence through “and shall.”  There are two different proposals after “and shall.” The Plaintiffs’/SDNY do not oppose the Monitor’s recommended language, but oppose 
the Defendants’ proposal.  The Defendants’ oppose the Monitor’s proposal.  Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose the Defendants’ proposal. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team agrees with the Parties that the RM’s onsite presence at DOC is critical. The Monitoring Team’s recommendation is modeled off language from the Hinds County Order on Receiver’s Duties which stated: 
“The Receiver’s authority and decisions are subject to review by the Court. To exercise these powers, the Receiver shall be onsite at RDC with sufficient frequency, regularity, and duration to carry out the Court’s Orders” See U.S. v. Hinds Cnty., et al., 3:16-cv-00489 
(S.D. Miss.), Dkt. 282-2, ¶ 5.  While the Monitoring Team agrees the RM should be onsite as much as possible, the Defendants’ proposal that the RM “shall not work remotely more than two business days per week” does not appear feasible because it sets a strict 
schedule with no flexibility.  There are a number of legitimate reasons that the RM may work remotely, which the Monitoring Team’s construction permits while reinforcing the importance of the RM’s onsite presence. 
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants’ object to the language as recommended by the Monitoring Team beginning with “be onsite…”. Defendants explain the basis for its proposal in Def. Objs., SECTION I, E-G: Full-Time and On-Site Requirements on pgs. 4-5; 
Defendants’ Supplemental Memorandum of Law in Support of Objections and Proposed Changes, dated September 10, 2025 (“Def. Supp. Objs.”) at 4.   
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose the construction by Defendants beginning with “not work.” This level of detail is not necessary in this Order.  However, we agree onsite presence is important and so we do not oppose the recommendation by the Monitoring 
Team.  We also note that the Remediation Manager is not a City employee, so remote work rules that apply to City employees are inapplicable. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in  
§ I 
 
Appointment of Nunez 
Remediation Manager and 
Nunez Remediation 
Manager’s Duties 
 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall inspect all 
Department facilities housing persons in custody at least 
one per month. 
  
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants’ proposal is opposed by the Plaintiffs’/SDNY .  The Monitor takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team defers to the Court and the Parties regarding the extent to which this requirement may be needed.   
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs., SECTION I, E-G: Full-Time and On-Site Requirements on pgs. 4-5.   
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 4 of 73
4 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. This level of detail is not necessary in this Order. Per the DOC website, DOC currently holds incarcerated individuals in 10 active facilities, including 2 hospital wards, and each facility varies in population and security 
needs.  We expect the Remediation Manager to exercise professional judgment in allocating inspection time among them. (See https://www.nyc.gov/site/doc/about/facilities.page). We propose instead the language we suggest above, in response to Defendants’ 
proposed “New Provision in § I,” which we believe is sufficient to cover the point that the Remediation Manager needs to be onsite regularly. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§ I 
 
Appointment of Nunez 
Remediation Manager and 
Nunez Remediation 
Manager’s Duties 
 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall be employed as 
the Remediation Manager on a full time basis, and shall 
maintain no other employment or contract work except as 
expressly approved by the Court, after notice and 
opportunity to be heard by the parties. 
  
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants’ proposal is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY .  The Monitor takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team defers to the Court and the Parties regarding the extent to which this requirement may be needed.   
 
Defendants’ Position: See Def. Objs.,SECTION I, E-G: Full-Time and On-Site Requirements on pgs. 4-5; Def. Supp. Obj. at 4.   
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. As an initial matter, the Remediation Manager is not an “employee” of the City.  In addition, the Court's original language in § XI, ¶ E, which we think should remain in the Order, sufficiently covers this principle of limiting 
any outside work performed by the Remediation Manager. We also particularly oppose language such as “after notice and opportunity to be heard by the parties.” We do not believe it is necessary to litigate these exceptions.  
 
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 5 of 73
5 
Section II: Development and Implementation of the Remediation Action Plan 
  
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ II, ¶ A 
 
Development and 
Implementation of the 
Remediation Action Plan 
The Nunez Remediation Manager, in consultation with 
the Commissioner and the Monitoring Team, shall 
develop a Remediation Action Plan.   
  
The Nunez Remediation Manager, in consultation 
with the Commissioner and the Monitoring Team, 
shall develop a Remediation Action Plan.  The  
[Defendants’ Proposal: to complete within two-
years after]  
[Plaintiffs’/SDNY Proposal: to be executed within 
the initial two-year period following] 
 
the Court’s approval of the Remediation Action Plan. 
Nothing in this provision relates to the tenure of the 
Nunez Remediation Manager, or the duration of their 
authority with respect to a specific Contempt 
Provision, which is governed exclusively by Sections 
III and IX. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Consent/no objection to the RAP covering two years, but two different proposals about the measurement of timing construction for the two years in yellow highlight.  There is consent/no objection to the proposed language at the 
end of the provision starting with “the Court’s approval”.  Upon finalization of the Order, a cross reference to the provisions regarding the duration and tenure of the RM is needed in the highlighted sections in yellow. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: for Revisions: The Monitor proposes these changes to streamline and clarify the timing and content of the RAP so it appears in one place in the order.   
• Timing: The Monitor recommends the RAP cover two years versus three years. The work within the agency is very dynamic, as demonstrated over the last 10 years of monitoring. The practical reality is that developing a plan beyond 2 years is speculative at 
best. Case in point, every Remedial Order developed has required refinements or additions within 2 years.  Given that the RM will have limited familiarity with the agency and have limited time to develop the RAP, the likelihood that an operationally 
practicable plan can be developed for work beyond 2 years does not seem feasible.  Given that, we recommend the plan focus on the first two years of the RM’s work. Additional work is likely necessary, but it is most reasonable and feasible that a plan for 
that additional work should be made at that time versus trying to modify an existing, no longer feasible plan.  Further, we recommend the timing of the plan be measured from the time the RAP is approved versus the time the RM is appointed/starts 
developing the plan.   
• Language for Timing: The Monitoring Team defers to the Court regarding Plaintiffs’/SDNY and Defendants’ positions regarding the description of the timing. 
• Clarification of Tenure and Duration: The final sentence was proposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY to ensure that it is clear that the tenure and duration of the Remediation Manager is exclusively governed by Sections III and IX and only terminates when the 
conditions set forth in those Sections are met. Defendants report that they do not object to its inclusion.  We therefore included it in the Monitor’s recommendations.  We note that Plaintiffs’ proposal includes a cross reference to Sections III.C and IX.A in 
their proposal.  Given the vast number of proposed revisions, the Monitoring Team believes it is premature to include specific references given it is unclear what the final numbering of the provisions will be and so we highlight the provisions requiring cross 
referencing so they can be completed when the final order is completed. 
 
Defendants’ Position: For the reasons stated in Defs. Objs. at 3, Defs. Supp. Objs. at 3, defendants believe that the Remediation Manager should be able to complete their work within a two year period following the Court’s approval of the RAP.  Although extension 
of the period is permissible under the Order, the Order should not presume that the two-year period is intended to be “initial” and will be extended.  Defendants have no objections to the language at the end of the provision beginning with “the Court’s approval”. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: First, with regard to the dispute as to “complete within” versus “executed within the initial,” we think the formulation proposed by Defendants could be read to suggest that the development of the plan is going to occur within 2 years, 
which is not the case. We therefore propose our language to clarify that the RAP will include steps to be executed within this initial two-year period. Second, with regard to the language at the end of the provision beginning with “the Court’s approval,” we do not 
object because we understand that given these revisions, the Order does not require or imply that if the RAP is two years, it is expected that Substantial Compliance be achieved in that time. We think the term of the RAP should either remain three years— of course, with 
the ability to be changed with the needs of the Remediation Manager’s work and the reform effort (as the next proposed revision reflects) —or the language should not imply that Substantial Compliance can be reached in two years. Lastly, the addition of the final sentence is 
intended to ensure that it is clear that the tenure of the Remediation Manager is exclusively governed by Sections III and IX and only terminates when the conditions set forth in those Sections are met.   
 
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 6 of 73
6 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§ II 
 
Development and 
Implementation of the 
Remediation Action Plan 
The Remediation Action Plan shall identify the specific 
and concrete steps that are necessary to achieve 
substantial compliance with the Contempt Provisions 
within no more than three years of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s Acceptance Effective Date.  The 
Remediation Action Plan shall include transformative 
and sustainable initiatives which shall include, any 
positive initiatives currently underway that must be 
sustained or enhanced.   
 
The Benchmarks set forth in the Remediation Action Plan 
shall be specific, objectively defined metrics reflecting 
the minimum requirements for Substantial Compliance 
with the Contempt Provisions (the “Final Benchmarks”) 
or interim targets for compliance (“Interim 
Benchmarks”).  The Benchmarks shall constitute 
objective metrics for the satisfaction of constitutional 
requirements, and shall not require actions, conditions or 
results that are not required by constitutional standards.  
The Remediation Action Plan shall have the minimum 
number of Final Benchmarks intended to reflect 
Substantial Compliance with the Contempt Provisions, 
and more than one Contempt Provision may be satisfied 
by achievement of the same Benchmark.  Benchmarks 
under this Order are not intended to replace the definition 
of Substantial Compliance under the Consent Judgment, 
although they should be relevant to that determination. 
 
i. The Remediation Action Plan shall identify 
the: 
1. include specific and concrete steps that 
are necessary to achieve substantial 
complianceSubstantial Compliance 
with the Contempt Provisions within no 
more than three years of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s Acceptance 
Effective Date. (“Benchmarks”). The 
Remediation Action PlanBenchmarks 
shall be organized into priorities with 
specified milestones to be achieved 
within 12-month periods, beginning 
with the safety-related areas and actions 
that are most urgently in need of 
attention; 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Consent/no objection to the Monitor’s Proposal except Defendants oppose defining the first sentence as Benchmarks and propose a separate definition for benchmarks.  The proposed definition of Benchmarks by Defendants is 
opposed by the Monitoring Team and the Plaintiffs’/SDNY. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: For clarity, the Monitoring Team has recommended the specific requirements for the RAP are placed in separate paragraphs.  The Monitoring Team proposes three separate paragraphs. Paragraph (a) is discussed in this box and then 
(b) and (c) which are discussed in the box below. 
 
The Monitoring Team has recommended that the Order include a definition of Benchmarks.  The Monitoring Team found that there was confusion among the parties and the Monitoring Team as to what constituted a Benchmark and that there was not a common 
understanding of what constituted a Benchmark.  Given the lack of a common understanding of a Benchmark and the role that Benchmarks play in both the development of the RAP and the termination of the RM’s authority over the Department, a common 
understanding of what the Benchmarks will be is necessary.   
 
With respect to the Defendants’ proposed Benchmarks, the Monitoring Team appreciates the effort to have greater clarity about what constitutes a Benchmark.  The Monitoring Team also agrees with the Court in encouraging incremental progress that can lead 
towards the termination and transition of the RM’s authority. Defendants’ proposal as drafted raises some concerns. First, it is the Monitoring Team’s understanding that the Benchmarks are intended to be specific and concrete steps to be taken in order to achieve 
Substantial Compliance with the Contempt Provisions. Defendants’ proposed language appears to suggest that the Benchmarks will serve as setting the standard for assessing compliance.  This appears to be a fundamental difference between how the Court and the 
Defendants conceive the Benchmarks. With respect to any proposal to set the standard for assessing compliance, we note that the assessment of compliance is already set by CJ § XX, ¶ 18.  Further, it is the responsibility of the Monitor, not the RM or the Parties to 
determine how compliance is assessed, so the Defendants’ proposed language conflicts with the fundamental role of the Monitor.  See, e.g., CJ § XX, ¶¶ 1 and 23. With respect to the proposed standard for assessing compliance, the Monitoring Team notes that 
exclusively setting objective metrics as the sole measurements to assess progress or compliance is simply not reasonable or feasible for the reasons outlined in the Monitor’s Reports (most recently, see the May 22, 2025 Monitor’s Report at pgs. 40 to 43). 
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants do not oppose the language except propose different text for the definition of Benchmarks. See Defs, Objs., SECTIONS I & II: Remediation Action Plan and Benchmarks on pgs. 3-4.  Defendants do not intend that Benchmarks 
replace the determination of Substantial Compliance, which remains a judgment within the purview of the Monitor and the Court according to the Consent Judgment.  Rather, the Benchmarks are intended to be a guide to achieving Substantial Compliance.  
Defendants believe that the Court should have the authority to limit the RM’s authority depending in achievement of Benchmarks or Substantial Compliance with the Contempt Provisions, but that termination of that authority be mandatory when Substantial 
Compliance with the Contempt Provisions is achieved. See ; Defs. Supp. Objs. at 5-6.   Defendants propose some changes to their proposed language to clarify the import of the Benchmarks and to address the Monitor’s concerns. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We do not oppose the language recommended by the Monitor. We oppose the definition proposed by Defendants. Defendants’ construction of “Benchmarks” is too narrow given the dynamic process unfolding and the Monitor’s repeated 
warnings that statistical metrics do not, on their own, accurately measure progress in this context. Moreover, “Substantial Compliance” is defined in the Consent Judgment and should not be redefined here with relationship to as-yet-undetermined Benchmarks. We 
share the Monitor’s understanding that the benchmarks “are intended to be specific and concrete steps to be taken in order to achieve Substantial Compliance with the Contempt Provisions,” rather than “serv[ing] as setting the standard for assessing compliance.” We 
do not believe that it is appropriate to ask the Remediation Manager to develop “objective metrics” that define what constitutes “satisfaction of constitutional requirements” with respect to the operation of a jail system. While the Remediation Plan may include 
benchmarks that include outcome-based measures or certain metrics designed to assess improvement in different areas, Defendants’ proposed language is unworkable. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§ II 
 
Further, the Remediation Action Plan shall address 
relevant recommendations from the Monitoring Team to 
support advancing compliance with the Contempt 
Provisions.  These actions shall be organized into 
priorities with specified benchmarks to be achieved 
  
b.      include transformative and 
sustainable initiatives which shall 
include any positive initiatives 
currently underway that must be 
sustained or enhanced.  Further, the 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 7 of 73
7 
Development and 
Implementation of the 
Remediation Action Plan 
within 12-month periods, beginning with the safety-
related areas and actions that are most urgently in need 
of attention. 
Remediation Action Plan shall address 
relevant recommendations from the 
Monitoring Team to support advancing 
compliance with the Contempt 
Provisions.  These actions shall be 
organized into priorities with specified 
benchmarks to be achieved within 12-
month periods, beginning with the 
safety-related areas and actions that 
are most urgently in need of attention. 
[Defendants propose the additional 
text of The initiatives must necessarily 
be operationally feasible to the 
Department and include reasonable 
implementation plans tailored to the 
Department’s operations.] ; and 
c.      address recommendations from 
the Monitoring Team to support 
advancing compliance with the 
Contempt Provisions.   
 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: The Monitoring Team proposes a formatting change to the text in the first sentence so it is its own paragraph, which all parties consent/no objection.  Separately, Defendants propose additional language in (b), but the 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose the additional text by Defendants. The revisions made to (c) are on consent or with no objections. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation:  
 
For part (b), The Monitoring Team does not propose changes to the language from the original Court order and just placed this language in a separate paragraph so it is easier to follow.  We note that Defendants have proposed that the provision include additional 
language that the RAP is operationally feasible and include reasonable implementation plans.  The Monitoring Team has raised the fact that the RAP must necessarily be operationally feasible and include reasonable implementation plans.  We determined that the 
language wasn’t necessary because a RAP simply won’t work if it isn’t operationally feasible or doesn’t include reasonable implementation plans.  To the extent that the RAP does include projects that are either not operationally feasible or do not have reasonable 
implementation plans, the Monitoring Team believes that can be addressed via the Monitor’s recommendations in (c). 
 
For part (c), The Monitoring Team proposes that the introductory clause is removed because it is not necessary.  The qualifier that the recommendations must be relevant is unnecessary and creates the possibility that certain recommendations from the Monitor could 
be irrelevant or not be addressed, which we don’t anticipate to be an issue. The language at the end of (c) was moved to paragraph (a) above. 
 
In short, it is the Monitoring Team’s understanding that there are no objections to any of the language proposed by the Monitoring Team, but that Defendants have proposed additional language for (b) that the Court will need to determine whether to include. 
 
 Defendants’ Position: Defendants propose additional language for paragraph (b).  No objections to (c). 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY Position: No objections to the Monitor’s revisions in (b) or (c). With respect to the proposed language by Defendants in (b), Plaintiffs and the Government agree with the Monitor that the language is not necessary. The RAP itself is a plan, and it is 
odd to require the initiatives set forth in that plan to also include implementation plans. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ II, ¶ A, I 
 
Development and 
Implementation of the 
Remediation Action Plan 
The Remediation Action Plan shall be provided to 
counsel for the Plaintiff Class and the United States in 
draft form for comment within 90 days of the date of the 
Acceptance Effective Date.  Counsel for the Plaintiff 
Class and the United States shall provide the 
Remediation Manager, Commissioner, and the 
Monitoring Team with their comments on the 
Remediation Action Plan, if any, within 21 days of 
receipt.  The Remediation Manager, in consultation with 
the Commissioner and Monitoring Team, shall consider 
the comments from Counsel for the Plaintiff Class and 
the United States and make any changes deemed 
  
The Remediation Action Plan shall be provided to 
counsel for the Plaintiff Class and the United 
Statesthe parties in draft form for comment within 90 
days of the date ofof the of the [the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s Acceptance of this 
appointment on the public docket for this case 
(“Acceptance Effective Date.  Counsel for the 
Plaintiff Class and the United States”)].  The parties 
shall provide the Nunez Remediation Manager, 
Commissioner, and the Monitoring Team, and the 
other parties with their comments on the 
Remediation Action Plan, if any, within 2130 days of 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 8 of 73
8 
necessary before filing the final proposed Remediation 
Action Plan with the Court.  The final Remediation 
Action Plan shall be filed with the Court for approval 
within 21 days of receipt of comments from the Counsel 
for the Plaintiff Class and United States. 
receipt.  The Nunez Remediation Manager, in 
consultation with the Commissioner and Monitoring 
Team, shall consider the comments from Counsel for 
the Plaintiff Class and the United Statesthe parties 
and make any changes deemed necessary before 
filing the final proposed Remediation Action Plan 
with the Court.  The final Remediation Action Plan 
shall be filed with the Court for approval within 21 
days of receipt of comments from the Counsel for the 
Plaintiff Class and United States. parties. 
Defendants’ Proposal: The parties shall have at 
least 20 business days to respond to the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s application pursuant to this 
provision, prior to the Court entering any Order in 
response to the application.] 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection to the revisions regarding the inclusion of “parties” (instead of Plaintiffs/SDNY) and the revisions to the timing for the comment period.  There are separate proposals regarding the issue of 
Acceptance/Start Date and the corresponding definition. Finally, Plaintiffs oppose the Defendants’ proposed language at the end of this provision and the Monitoring Team doesn’t’ believe it is necessary. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: This provision includes three proposed changes.   
 
First, the changes permit all Parties to comment on the RAP.  The original language contemplated consultation with the Commissioner, but the Defendants’ proposed that Defendants should also have an opportunity to comment on the RAP (and we understand there is 
no objection from Plaintiffs’/SDNY).   
 
Second, depending on the outcome of the Court’s determination of when the RM may start/be granted authority (see the Monitoring Team’s recommendation in Section § XII (Effective Date) regarding this issue), the timing for the initiation of the RAP will need to be 
tailored to match when the RM actually begins doing his work.  For instance, the RM may accept the position on one day but start work on a different day.  We believe the timing of the RAP should be tied to when the RM actually begins working if there is a 
difference between the time of acceptance and when the RM starts work.  The text in brackets should be defined/tailored once that has been determined by the Court. 
 
Third, Defendants proposed some revisions to the timing for the exchange of comments and feedback, which we adopted. 
 
Finally, with respect to the Defendants’ proposal for an opportunity to respond to the RM’s submission, the Monitoring Team does not believe a presumptive briefing schedule is necessary.   
 
Defendants’ explanation: No objection. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY explanation: No objection to the Monitor’s proposed language but for our proposed revision to the Court’s original language to remove the phrase “on the public docket for this case” from the definition of Acceptance Effective Date, because it 
presents an apparent conflict with the language of Proposed Order Section XII, which says the order is effective when the Remediation Manager returns a signed copy of the order to the Court via email, not public filing. We have no objection to such acceptance being 
filed on the public docket, of course, and would indeed appreciate if it were. The revision is simply proposed to avoid any conflicting readings of those two provisions.  
 
We also noting that we oppose the Monitor’s proposed revision in XII (B) regarding delayed conferral of authority, so in our view the only revisions necessary to this provision are (1) revision on consent of “Plaintiff Class and United States” to “parties;” (2) change 
to the timing of the comment period (Defendants’ proposal to which we do not object); and (3) definition of Acceptance Date as it was deleted from § I, ¶  B (with the caveat about the “public docket” language we note in the paragraph just above this one). We also 
note that we think “Acceptance Effective Date” can be defined to mean the date that the Remediation Manager steps into the role, given the word “effective,” should the Court wish to avoid having different “Acceptance” and “Start” dates. This could therefore read: 
“the Nunez Remediation Manager’s Acceptance of this appointment, (“Acceptance Effective Date”), on which they will begin work.” 
 
We object to Defendants’ proposed language and the end of the provision, as we agree with the Monitor that this Order need not predetermine a briefing schedule about an unknown issue of unknown complexity. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ II, ¶ A, ii 
 
Development and 
Implementation of the 
Remediation Action Plan 
The Remediation Manager may thereafter seek to modify 
or amend the Remediation Action Plan upon application 
to the Court.  The Remediation Manager shall consult 
with the Commissioner and the Monitoring Team in 
advance of any application before making any such 
application to the Court and any such application shall be 
made on notice to the parties and the Monitoring Team. 
 
The Nunez Remediation Manager may thereafter seek to 
modify or amend the Remediation Action Plan, including 
changing the timing of the target period for any particular 
element of the Remediation Action Plan, upon application 
to the Court.  The Remediation Manager shall consult with 
the Commissioner, and the Monitoring Team, and the 
parties in advance of any application before making any 
such application to the Court and any such application shall 
be made on notice to the parties and the Monitoring Team. 
The Nunez Remediation Manager may thereafter 
seek to modify or amend the Remediation Action 
Plan, including changing the timing of the target 
period for any particular element of the Remediation 
Action Plan, upon application to the Court.  The 
Nunez Remediation Manager shall consult with the 
Commissioner and the Monitoring Team in advance 
ofon any applicationmodifications.  The Nunez 
Remediation Manger shall then provide the 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 9 of 73
9 
[Defendants proposal: proposed revised] 
Remediation Action Plan to the parties for comment 
before making any such application to the Court and 
any such application shall be made on notice to the 
parties and the Monitoring Team.  
Defendants’ Proposal: The parties shall have at 
least 20 business days to respond to the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s application pursuant to this 
provision, prior to the Court entering any Order in 
response to the application.] 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection to the changes to the revisions to add “Nunez” before Remediation Manager for consistency.  The additional text in the first sentence is also on consent/no objection. There are two different proposals 
regarding the consultation/comment period.  The Defendants do not oppose the Monitoring Team’s proposal.  The Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose the Monitoring Team’s proposal. Plaintiffs oppose the Defendants’ proposed final sentence and the Monitoring Team does not 
believe Defendants’ proposed language is necessary. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The process for modification of the RAP, including extension of time (originally in § I, ¶ B), was all consolidated into this provision so that the modification process is all managed by the same requirements.  The Monitoring Team 
proposes different language than that of Plaintiffs’/SDNY.  As with the creation of the RAP, the Monitoring Team believes the process for the revisions of the RAP should first be initiated with consultation with the Commissioner and the Monitoring Team as it is most 
practical and logistically feasible.  The Commissioner and Monitoring Team will be working with the RM on the implementation of the RAP all the of the time.  The Parties can then obtain the document for comment after obtaining the input from the Monitor and 
Commissioner. As currently drafted, this appears to permit a simultaneous process, which is burdensome and inefficient.  Given our extensive experience in addressing Nunez matters, we strongly recommend that this process occur first with the Commissioner and the 
Monitor.  The Parties can then comment and will then also have the benefit of the feedback, if any, from the Commissioner and Monitor regarding the operational feasibility of the proposed revisions.  Further, we note that nothing in the Monitoring Team’s 
construction implicates concerns that Plaintiffs’/SDNY believe will hinder the RM’s ability to communicate with the Parties or share ideas.  The RM can communicate with the parties as needed, but the RAP is necessarily an operational document and we think that 
first addressing those matters with those directly engaged in this process is most practical and feasible and does not preclude the Parties from also commenting. 
 
Defendants’ Position: Do not oppose the Monitor’s proposal.  Defendants agree that a meet and confer with all parties is appropriate before the RM makes any application to the Court. Defendants agree with the Monitor that the RM should also consult with the 
Monitoring Team and the Commissioner prior to proposing any changes to the parties for a meet and confer, or the Court. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose the Monitor’s construction. We do not believe formally requiring the Remediation Manager to consult with the Monitor and the Commissioner about modifications to the RAP before discussing any proposed modifications 
with the Parties is necessary or helpful in this context. The Remediation Manager should feel free to discuss any element of their work—or changes to that work— with all stakeholders as they deem appropriate or useful in their judgment. These revisions impose an 
unnecessarily restrictive process on a dynamic reform effort. In our view the language we proposed— simply requiring consultation with the Commissioner, the Monitoring Team, and the parties prior to making a court application and without unnecessarily 
articulating the order in which the RM must do so—is most appropria te. 
 
We object to Defendants’ proposed language and the end of the provision, as we do not believe this Order should predetermine a briefing schedule about an unknown issue of unknown complexity. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ II, ¶ B 
 
Development and 
Implementation of the 
Remediation Action Plan 
Implementation of the Remediation Action Plan must 
begin immediately upon its approval by the Court.  This 
work shall be undertaken in collaboration with the 
Commissioner to the greatest extent consistent with 
efficiency, effectuation of change, and the fostering of a 
respectful, sustainably safety-oriented approach to 
management. 
Implementation of the Remediation Action Plan must 
begin immediately upon its approval by the Court.  This 
work shall be undertaken in collaboration with the 
Commissioner to the greatest extent consistent with 
efficiency, effectuation of change, and the fostering of a 
respectful, sustainably safety-oriented approach to 
management 
  
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants propose removal of text, which is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY.  The Monitoring Team takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: Monitor defers to the Court and the Parties regarding this revision. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs., SECTIONS I & II: Remediation Action Plan and Benchmarks on pgs. 3-4. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. This original language is necessary and consistent with the Remediation Manager’s role as the ultimate authority with regard to the actions needed to be taken to comply with the Contempt Provisions. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ II, ¶ C 
 
Within 30 days following Court approval of the 
Remediation Action Plan, the Remediation Manager, the 
Monitoring Team, and the Commissioner shall jointly 
Within 30 days following Court approval of the 
Remediation Action Plan, the Nunez Remediation 
Manager, the Monitoring Team, and the Commissioner 
 
Within 30 days following Court approval of the 
Remediation Action Plan, the Nunez Remediation 
Manager, the Monitoring Team, and the 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 10 of 73
10 
Development and 
Implementation of the 
Remediation Action Plan 
develop an updated DOC organizational chart that 
includes delineation of the reporting lines of divisions, 
operational functions, and personnel that are subject to 
the direct authority of the Remediation Manager and the 
Commissioner, respectively, and those where both 
exercise direct authority over aspects of the divisions, 
operations, and personnel.  In the event of conflict 
regarding divisions of labor, the Nunez Remediation 
Manager has ultimate authority. 
shall jointly develop an updated DOC organizational 
chart that includes delineation of the reporting lines of 
divisions, operational functions, and personnel that are 
subject to the direct authority of the Nunez Remediation 
Manager and the Commissioner, respectively, and those 
where both exercise direct authority over aspects of the 
divisions, operations, and personnel.  In the event of 
conflict regarding divisions of labor, the 
NunezDefendants or the Nunez Remediation Manager 
has ultimate authoritymay bring the matter to the 
attention of the Court for resolution, with notice and 
opportunity to be heard by the parties. 
Commissioner shall jointly develop an updated DOC 
organizational chart that includes delineation of the 
reporting lines of divisions, operational functions, 
and personnel that are subject to the direct authority 
of the Nunez Remediation Manager and the 
Commissioner, respectively, and those where both 
exercise direct authority over aspects of the 
divisions, operations, and personnel.  In the event of 
conflict regarding divisions of labor, the Nunez 
Remediation Manager has ultimate authority. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants propose revisions which are opposed by the Plaintiffs’/SDNY.  The Monitor takes no position.  The revisions to include “Nunez” before Remediation Manager are for consistency and on consent/no objection. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: Monitor defers to the Court and the Parties regarding this revision. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs., SECTIONS I & II: Remediation Action Plan and Benchmarks on pgs. 3-4. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose Defendants’ proposal. The Remediation Manager’s role as the ultimate authority with regard to what needs to be done to comply with Contempt Provisions is an important structural component of this Order, without which it 
may not be workable. Moreover, of course any party may bring any issue to the Court at any time, whenever it is appropriate to do so, without the Order so prescribing. 
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 11 of 73
11 
Section III: Assessment of Compliance & Transition Back to DOC Control 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ III, ¶ A 
 
Assessment of Compliance 
& Transition Back to DOC 
Control 
The Monitor shall file a report within 130 days following 
each Reporting Period1 describing the efforts the 
Department and the Remediation Manager have taken to 
implement the requirements of the Remediation Action 
Plan and evaluating the extent to which the Department 
and Remediation Manager have complied with the 
benchmarks of the Remediation Action Plan and each of 
the Contempt Provisions. 
 
After the Remediation Action Plan has been approved by 
the Court, the bi-annual Monitor’s Report for each 
Reporting Period2 describing the shall also include a 
description of the efforts the Department and the Nunez 
Remediation Manager have taken to implement the 
requirements of the Remediation Action Plan and 
evaluatingan evaluation of the extent to which the 
Department and Remediation Manager Defendants have 
complied with the benchmarks of the Remediation Action 
Plan and each of the Contempt Provisions. Upon a finding 
by The reports should also describe the Monitoring Team 
that one or more ofextent to which the Defendants have 
met the benchmarks of the Remediation Action Plan or the 
Contempt Provisions isset forth in the Remediation Action 
Plan. 
The Monitor shall file a report within 130 days 
following each Reporting Period3 describing the 
efforts the Department and the Remediation Manager 
have taken to implement the requirements of the 
Remediation Action Plan and evaluating the extent to 
which the Department and Remediation Manager 
have complied with the benchmarks of the 
Remediation Action Plan and each of the Contempt 
Provisions. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: The Monitoring Team has proposed moving this provision to § VI, which Defendants do not object to.  However, Plaintiffs’ contend the language should remain in this section.  The proposals regarding the language for the 
Monitor’s reports can be found in Section VI.   
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: With respect to the timing of the Monitor’s Report, this language is no longer necessary in this order because it is addressed in Consent Judgment § XX, ¶ 17 and modified by the Court’s July 25, 2025 Order (dkt.888). Further, for 
clarity and to avoid confusion, we suggest all requirements related to Monitor’s reports are addressed within the provisions related to the Monitor’s Role in §VI of this order. In particular, we recommend the text regarding the content of the Monitor’s Reports 
(beginning with Upon approval”…) is moved to § VI, ¶ B of the Order so the requirements for the content of the Monitor’s Report are all in one place. 
 
 Defendants’ Position: No objections. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose moving this paragraph to Section VI because this description of what the Monitor’s reports will cover is necessary context for the following two paragraphs, regarding what will happen if the Monitor finds Substantial 
Compliance in such reports. Regarding the changes Plaintiffs propose to the text of this provision (as opposed to its placement within the Order), our basis is set forth below in Section VI.B, where the Monitor and Defendants propose to move this provision. 
Defendants’ and the Monitor’s position on Plaintiffs’ proposed changes are also included in that section.  
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ III, ¶ B 
 
Assessment of Compliance 
& Transition Back to DOC 
Control 
Upon a finding by the Monitoring Team that one or more 
of the benchmarks of the Remediation Action Plan or the 
Contempt Provisions is in Substantial Compliance, the 
Court shall determine whether Substantial Compliance 
with the relevant benchmark(s) and/or Contempt 
Provision(s) has been achieved. 
 
Upon a finding by the Monitoring Team that one or more 
of the benchmarks of the Remediation Action Plan or the 
Contempt Provisions is in Substantial Compliance, the 
Court shall determine whether Substantial Compliance 
with the relevant benchmark(s) and/or Contempt 
Provision(s) has been achieved. 
In the event the Monitor finds Defendants to be in 
Substantial Compliance (defined in Section XX, ¶ 18 of the 
Consent Judgment ) with one or more of the Contempt 
Provisions during a Reporting Period, the Nunez 
Remediation Manager shall, within 15 days, work with the 
Commissioner on a Transition Plan that outlines: (i) how to 
sustain the progress achieved, (ii) the steps the Nunez 
Remediation Manager will take to prepare the Department 
to operate independently in the relevant area, and (iii) the 
actions the Department will take to maintain the required 
Upon a finding by the Monitoring Team that one or 
more of the benchmarks of the Remediation Action 
Plan or the Contempt Provisions is in Partial or 
Substantial Compliance, the CourtNunez 
Remediation Manager shall determine whether 
Substantial Compliancebegin working with the 
Commissioner to prepare a Transition Plan that shifts 
responsibility for all functions related to the relevant 
benchmark(s) and/Benchmark or Contempt 
Provision(s) has been achieved. back to the 
Department. 
 
1  The Reporting Periods in this case cover January 1 to June 30 and July 1 to December 31 of each year. 
2     The Reporting Periods in this case cover January 1 to June 30 and July 1 to December 31 of each year. 
3  The Reporting Periods in this case cover January 1 to June 30 and July 1 to December 31 of each year. 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 12 of 73
12 
performance level and sustain compliance. The Monitor 
shall be consulted on the Transition Plan. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There are two different proposals – one proposed by Plaintiffs and one proposed by the Monitoring Team.  Defendants agree with the Monitor’s proposal.  The Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose the Monitor’s proposal. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team supports the Court’s overarching goals that the work of the RM must support sustainable reforms by the Defendants and that return to local control must occur as quickly as possible.  To that end, transition 
planning should begin as soon as possible, which is why we propose it is initiated with a finding by the Monitoring Team of Partial Compliance.  Of course, more work will be needed to achieve Substantial Compliance, but the RM should be working with the 
Defendants on ways to ensure this occurs with their involvement and ultimate return to control.  This approach reinforces the Court’s stated goal that the return occur as quickly as possible. May 13, 2025 Order at pg. 36. With respect to the Court’s evaluation of 
Benchmarks, the Monitoring Team believes the Court’s goal to identify ways for the RM to return authority back to the Defendants before SC with an entire provision has been met is important and necessary and therefore, the original proposal by the Court should 
remain.  We further reinforce the need for sustainability of the reforms when authority transitions back to Defendants.  We do think it is important to note the distinction between termination of authority of the RM and the termination of the provision itself.  As noted 
in other parts of this order, the provision is not terminated upon the removal of the RM’s authority.  In fact, a key part of sustainability is that monitoring will continue following the transition of the RM’s authority back to Defendants. 
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants agree with the Monitor’s proposed changes because it is essential that the RM’s authority over a specific area be terminated when that authority is no longer needed to remedy an ongoing constitutional violation. For the same 
reason, defendants do not agree that a period of successive compliance periods should be required before reversion of authority to the Commissioner. See Def.. Objs. I at 6; Def. Modification Memorandum at 24-25; and Def. Supp. Objs. at 4-5. Even if one or two 
Courts have disregarded this requirement without consideration of the legal implications under the PLRA, that does not provide any significant authority that the practice could withstand legal scrutiny. 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose the Monitor’s revisions. 
First, regarding the timing of transition planning: we too share the Court’s goals for sustainable progress with swift return of control to Defendants when progress can be sustained. As such, we have proposed a change here that would require transition planning to 
begin swiftly after one finding by the Monitor—rather than requiring a judicial finding—that the Defendants are in Substantial Compliance with a Contempt Provision.  
But triggering such work with one Partial Compliance rating does not support sustainable and efficient reform. The record in this case is replete with evidence that a Partial Compliance rating from the Monitor does not mean Defendants are on a path toward 
Substantial Compliance (as we described in our Memorandum of Law in Opposition to Defendants’ Motion to Reconsider, Dkt. 889, at 9-11). Indeed, this Court found Defendants in contempt for provisions that the Monitor had rated Partially Compliant. The 
Monitor’s proposal means that transition planning should start on those provisions right now. Moreover, Partial Compliance can represent a wide range of conduct, because under the Consent Judgment it only means that Defendants have “achieved compliance on 
some component” of a provision while “significant work remains” to achieve the Substantial Compliance required by the Nunez Orders. Dkt. No. 249, at 54 n.3. A point at which “significant work remains” is not an appropriate point at which transition planning 
should begin. That would likely be a waste of time and resources, as the record demonstrates that it could be years before Defendants achieve sustained (or even initial) findings of Substantial Compliance, rendering that transition planning stale. We strongly oppose 
any transfer of authority based on “findings that benchmarks have been achieved.”  
Plaintiffs and the Government recognize the utility of benchmarks as guideposts for the work under the Remediation Action Plan and as potential indicators of Defendants’ progress towards compliance. However, meeting to-be-determined benchmarks is not the same 
as achieving substantial compliance with the Contempt Provisions. Not only do we think that terminating authority based on meeting benchmarks is likely unworkable given the piecemeal and as-yet-unknown nature of those benchmarks, but benchmarks are not 
governed by the same ratings requirements as are Contempt Provisions and this dual-track compliance assessment process is untenable. There is a clear, incremental process by which Defendants may reassume the authority that this Order grants to the Remediation 
Manager: by achieving Substantial Compliance with individual Contempt Provisions. Subdividing that process will not be feasible, given the nature of benchmarks as steps toward a particular area of compliance, rather than independent functions themselves, and 
their likely character as an inevitably difficult-to-sever piece of a broader strategy.  In our view, attempting to break them off in a piecemeal fashion will be a barrier to a sustainable reform effort. This waters down the efficacy of the remedial orders already in place in 
this case. This order’s grant of authority to the Remediation Manager is a remedy to cure contempt of specific provisions of court orders and should stay in place until the contempt is purged and Defendants are in compliance. The Remediation Plan, and the 
benchmarks included in those, should be viewed as the path to get to substantial compliance— not a replacement for it.   
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ III, ¶ C 
 
Assessment of Compliance 
& Transition Back to DOC 
Control 
Within 30 days of the Court’s finding, the Nunez 
Remediation Manager shall be obligated to work with 
the Commissioner on a Transition Plan that outlines (1) 
how to sustain the progress achieved, (2) the steps the 
Remediation Manager will take to prepare the 
Department to operate independently in the relevant 
area, and (3) the actions the Department will take to 
maintain the required performance level and sustain 
compliance. 
 
Substantial Compliance, the Court shall determine whether 
Substantial Compliance with the relevant benchmark(s) 
and/or Contempt Provision(s) has been achieved. Within 
30 days of the Court’s finding, the Nunez Remediation 
Manager shall be obligated to work with the Commissioner 
on a Transition Plan that outlines (1) how to sustain the 
progress achieved, (2) the steps the Remediation Manager 
will take to prepare the Department to operate 
independently in the relevant area, and (3) the actions the 
Department will take to maintain the required performance 
level and sustain compliance.   
Within 30 days of the Court’s finding, the Nunez 
Remediation Manager shall be obligated to work 
with the Commissioner on aThe Transition Plan that 
outlinesshall include: (1) how to sustain the progress 
achieved, (2) the steps the Nunez Remediation 
Manager will take to prepare the Department to 
operate independently in the relevant area, and (3) 
the actions the Department will take to maintain the 
required performance level and sustain compliance.  
The Transition Plan shall prepare for the termination 
of the Nunez Remediation Manager’s authority 
within 1 year of the end of the Monitoring Period in 
which the Monitor finds the relevant benchmark or 
Contempt Provision in Substantial Compliance. The 
Monitor shall be consulted on the Transition Plan. 
 
Within 30 days of the issuance of the Monitor’s 
Report finding that one or more of the benchmarks of 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 13 of 73
13 
the Remediation Action Plan or one or more of the 
Contempt Provisions is in Substantial Compliance, 
the Transition Plan shall be finalized, implemented, 
and submitted to the Court by the Nunez 
Remediation Manager. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There are two different proposals.  Plaintiffs have one proposal.  The Monitoring Team has a separate proposal, which Plaintiffs oppose.  Defendants consent to the Monitor’s two proposed provisions with one exception.  
Defendants oppose the inclusion of the two sentences in the first paragraph beginning with “The Transition Plan shall prepare for the termination…”  
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team proposes that the period for the Transition Plan is one year from the end of the Monitoring Period in which Substantial Compliance is achieved.  For example, if Substantial Compliance is achieved in the 20th 
Monitoring Period (January to June 2025), the time would be counted from June 30, 2025 to June 30, 2026.  We believe this is sufficient time to implement and sustain the Transition Plan, while also permitting the other Nunez processes to occur including the filing 
of the Monitor’s Report (which occurs approximately 5 and a half months after the end of the Monitoring Period) and for the necessary Court proceedings to take place and conclude.  As noted in the next section, of course, alterations to this timing can be made by 
the Court if necessary.  The Monitoring Team also recommends it is consulted on the Transition Plan.  Finally, the Monitoring Team proposes the Transition Plan is provided to the Court as the Order does not currently require either submission or implementation of 
the Transition Plan as the current construction only requires the plan be created (and implies implementation).  
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants consent to the Monitor’s proposed language, except they object to the additional language in this section regarding termination of the RM’s authority within  one year for the reasons stated above with respect to Section II, B.  
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: As we noted in our comments to § III, ¶ B above, we do not oppose Defendants’ revision that reflects that the Remediation Manager will begin work on a transition plan 15 days after the first Monitor finding that a Contempt Provision 
(but not a benchmark) is in Substantial Compliance. We also do not object to the Court’s description of what the transition plan should contain, and have therefore included those requirements in our transition planning proposal in § III, ¶ B above. Because both the 
trigger for developing and the contents of a transition plan are covered in § III, ¶ B under our proposal, we would omit the current § III, ¶ C.  Furthermore, we strongly believe that termination of the Remediation Manager’s authority over any Contempt Provision 
should still require a judicial finding that Defendants are in sustained Substantial Compliance for three successive reporting periods, as we explain below with regard to § III, ¶ D.  We reiterate our strong opposition to using “benchmarks” as triggers for transition 
plans or, as we articulate in other sections, termination of the Remediation Manager’s authority.  
 
We oppose the Monitor’s proposed revisions (but for the proposal that the Remediation Manager work with the Monitor as well as the Commissioner in developing the Transition Plan, which we think reasonable and have included in our proposed revisions to § III, ¶ 
B). As we have explained, we think the Court’s construction requiring three reporting periods of Substantial Compliance critically important. In our view, the Monitor’s proposal that requires transition of authority one year following one Monitor finding of 
Substantial Compliance is inconsistent with the Court’s correctly-formulated termination structure because, as has happened multiple times in the past, Defendants could backslide into Partial or Non-Compliance during that period. The Monitor’s proposed revisions 
effectively set a one-year sunset period on the Remediation Manager’s authority over the relevant Contempt Provision regardless of whether Defendants sustain the Substantial Compliance required by the Court’s orders. Such a construction prioritizes process over 
results and does not adequately prioritize the utility of appointing a Remediation Manager as an investment in the sustainability of compliance.  
 
We also strongly oppose the sentence that begins “Within 30 days of the issuance of the Monitor’s Report...” for two reasons. First, we think it overly prescriptive for this Order to set a 30-day deadline by which the Remediation Manager must develop a Transition 
Plan for any Contempt Provision. The Remediation Manager may be developing a plan for more than one Contempt Provision, and additionally, not all Contempt Provisions require the same level of complexity (“implement the Use of Force Directive” will likely 
require much more complex transition planning than “improve painful escort holds.”). Moreover, the Remediation Manager should be permitted to weigh in— with the professional judgment for which the Court is appointing them— on how long a particular Transition 
Plan (or the transition it describes) will take at a particular moment in the reform effort. Second, the Remediation Manager should not be required to “implement” the Transition Plan within 30 days as the Monitor’s proposal reflects, both because of the importance of 
allowing the Remediation Manager to be involved with developing the timelines for transition planning and because termination of the Remediation Manager’s authority should only occur after the Court has found sustained Substantial Compliance, as we describe in 
the paragraph above and in our comments to § III, ¶ B. The Remediation Manager should, as our proposal reflects, begin work on the Transition Plan within 15 days of the first Monitor finding of Substantial Compliance—we want that Plan to be thoughtful, practical, 
and ready to be implemented after Defendants have sustained Substantial Compliance— but to rush the transition with arbitrary timelines that may not reflect operational realities is unworkable. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ III, ¶ D 
 
Assessment of Compliance 
& Transition Back to DOC 
Control 
The Remediation Manager’s authority over the relevant 
benchmark of the Remediation Action Plan or Contempt 
Provision shall be terminated upon the Monitoring 
Team’s filing of the Monitor’s Report that reports the 
benchmark of the Remediation Action Plan or Contempt 
Provision in Substantial Compliance for the third 
successive Reporting Period. 
Upon the Court’s finding that the City is in Substantial 
Compliance with one or more Contempt Provisions or 
that a reduction in the Nunez Remediation Manager’s 
authority is otherwise warranted pursuant to Section III-D 
above, the Nunez Remediation Manager’s authority over 
the relevant benchmark of the Remediation Action Plan 
or Contempt Provision(s) and any related Benchmarks 
shall be terminated upon the Monitoring Team’s filing of 
the Monitor’s Report that reports the benchmark of the 
Remediation Action Plan or Contempt Provision in 
Substantial Compliance for the third successive Reporting 
Period.as soon as possible and in no event later than 30 
days following the Court’s finding. 
The Remediation Manager’s authority over the relevant 
benchmark of the Remediation Action Plan or Contempt 
Provision shall be terminated upon the Monitoring Team’s 
filing of the Monitor’s Report that reports the benchmark 
of the Remediation Action Plan or Contempt Provision in 
Substantial Compliance for the third successive Reporting 
Period. 
 
TheIn the event the Monitor finds Defendants to be in 
Substantial Compliance with one or more Contempt 
Provisions for three successive Reporting Periods (i.e. for 
18 months), the Court shall determine whether Substantial 
Compliance with the relevant Contempt Provision(s) has 
been achieved. The Nunez Remediation Manager’s 
authority over the relevant benchmark of the Remediation 
Action Plan or Contempt Provision(s) shall be terminated 
only upon the Monitoring Team’s filing of the Monitor’s 
Upon receipt of the Transition Plan, the Court shall 
determine whether Substantial Compliance with the 
relevant benchmark(s) and/or Contempt Provision(s) 
has been achieved and shall approve the Transition 
Plan, with any modifications the Court deems 
necessary. 
 
The Nunez Remediation Manager’s authority over 
the relevant benchmark of the Remediation Action 
Plan or Contempt Provision shall be terminated 
uponwithin 1 year of the Monitoring Team’s filing of 
the Monitor’s Report that reportsPeriod in which the 
Monitor finds the relevant benchmark of the 
Remediation Action Plan or Contempt Provision in 
Substantial Compliance for the third successive 
Reporting Period. This date may be modified by the 
Court as necessary. 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 14 of 73
14 
ReportCourt’s finding, after having heard from the parties, 
that reports the benchmark of the Remediation Action Plan 
or Contempt Provision Defendants have been in 
Substantial Compliance with the Contempt Provision for 
the thirdthree successive Reporting PeriodPeriods. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There are three different proposals.  For the Monitor’s proposal, the Defendants consent to the Monitor’s first paragraph (Upon transition…), but object to the second paragraph.  Defendants propose a separate second paragraph 
after the Monitor’s proposal “Upon transition.”  Plaintiffs oppose the Monitor’s proposal in its entirety.  Defendants oppose Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s proposal.   
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team recommends that the Court’s finding is initiated with the submission of the Transition Plan in order to further reinforce the importance of sustainability.  The Monitoring Team agrees with the Court that such 
finding should be made upon the first finding of Substantial Compliance given the importance of returning local control as quickly as possible and ensuring transition planning has occurred as soon as possible to support sustainable reforms.  Ultimately, the 
Defendants, not the RM, need to sustain the reforms so we recommend the Court reinforce the need for a smooth transition and sustainable reforms by Defendants.  Ongoing sustainability of the reforms by the RM does not mean that the Defendants will then in fact 
sustain such reforms when authority is transitioned back to them.  Finally, it must be noted that the termination of the RM’s authority is not the same as the termination of the provision.  The Defendants will be subject to ongoing monitoring, which is critical to 
support the sustainability of the reforms. We appreciate the feedback from Plaintiffs/SDNY that the Transition Plan is likely to be a dynamic document and thus submission to the Court and/or entering it as a Court Order may not be a feasible option.  Given that, 
alternatively, one options could be that the RM could either advise the Court the Transition Plan is final and/or just provide a copy for in camera review.  As flexibility on the transition is paramount, the Monitor’s proposal regarding transition planning could be 
altered to just set the specific time for when the transition period will be completed. 
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants consent to the proposed language in the first paragraph of the Monitor’s proposal and object to the second paragraph for the reasons stated above. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: Our proposed revisions to this subsection are intended to create the clearest and most workable standard for when and how the Remediation Manager’s authority will terminate over a particular Contempt Provision. Under our proposal, 
as we understand that the Court indicated in Section IX.A, the Remediation Manager’s authority with respect to a specific Contempt Provision would terminate only upon the Court’s finding of substantial compliance for three successive Reporting Periods (not just 
the Monitor’s assessment). We believe requiring sustained compliance is not only critical given the history in this case, but is also in line with what other courts have recognized is necessary in crafting other receivership orders. See United States v. Miami-Dade Cnty., 
No. 13-cv-21570, Stipulated Order Regarding Appointment of Independent Jail Compliance Director (S.D. Fla. Feb. 16, 2023), Dkt. 260 at 13; Plata v. Schwarzenegger, No. C01-1351, Order Appointing Receiver at 6 (N.D. Cal. Feb. 14, 2006), Dkt. 473 at 7; Jones v. 
Gusman, 2:12-cv-00859, Stipulated Order for Appointment of Independent Jail Compliance Director (E.D. La. June 21, 2016), Dkt. 1082 at 3. We revised the language to be consistent with Section IX.A as we understand it.  
 
Again, we strongly oppose tying termination of authority to benchmarks rather than Contempt Provisions for the reasons we describe above. We think the Contempt Provisions represent an incentive for incremental return of authority to Defendants, and in fact is the 
only practical manner in which such incremental return can happen without compromising the effectiveness and sustainability of the Remediation Manager’s work.   
 
We oppose Defendants’ proposal for the reasons we articulated in our comments on § III, ¶¶ B and C: that in our view one reporting period of Substantial Compliance is insufficient to demonstrate sustained Substantial Compliance, that benchmarks should not trigger 
transition planning or termination of the Remediation Manager’s authority, and that setting an arbitrary 30-day period to terminate authority or implement a transition plan is unworkable and contrary to goals of sustainable reform.  
 
We oppose the Monitor’s proposal for similar reasons. We agree that a judicial finding should be necessary before the Remediation Manager’s authority terminates (as our proposed revisions to § III, ¶ B reflect), but think it critically important that the Court conduct 
that evaluation after sustained compliance is demonstrated by three findings, over three successive Monitoring Periods, of Substantial Compliance. One Monitor finding of Substantial Compliance is, in our view, a premature basis to trigger a judicial evaluation given 
the record of backsliding in this case. Of course we agree with the Monitor that it is Defendants, not the Remediation Manager, who must sustain compliance— but the goal of the transition planning period and the requirement of a showing of sustained compliance 
before transitioning authority back to Defendants is to ensure that there is a solid foundation of compliance that will at last allow for sustainable change. We do not think the fact that the Contempt Provision “will remain” after the Remediation Manager’s departure, 
with attendant monitoring, is sufficient to address this concern. Indeed, the reason a Remediation Manager is being appointed is because the existence of court orders that were independently monitored for nearly a decade has been an insufficient remedy for the 
constitutional violations in this case. 
 
Finally, the Monitor’s proposal that the Court enter the Transition Plan as a Court order is premature and potentially unworkable. We expect transition plans to have extensive operational detail that may not be appropriate for a Court order (or may not meet the 
applicable PLRA standards for injunctive relief), and the proposal would also add another layer of Court orders in this matter. The Court can address the Transition Plan as it sees appropriate when those circumstances arise. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§ III 
 
Assessment of Compliance 
& Transition Back to DOC 
Control 
 
The Court shall routinely assess the progress of the 
Remediation Action Plan following the issuance of the 
Monitor’s Report.  At a minimum, after every Reporting 
Period, the Court shall determine, after an opportunity to 
be heard by the parties, whether the Remediation Action 
Plan has resulted in: (a) substantial and demonstrable 
progress in achieving Substantial Compliance with the 
Contempt Provisions or achievement of the Benchmarks; 
(b) whether such efforts have resulted in a substantial 
reduction in the risk of harm currently facing incarcerated 
individuals and DOC staff; and (c) whether Substantial 
Compliance with the Contempt Provisions or 
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 15 of 73
15 
achievement of the Benchmarks, or other factors, 
warrants a reduction in the authority of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants propose language that is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY .  To the extent that the Court determines an assessment like the one proposed by Defendants should be adopted, the Monitor has proposed some considerations for 
the Court in the explanation below. 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team appreciates the overall goal stated by the Court, and emphasized by Defendants, that return to local control should occur as quickly as possible.  To that end, the Court has devised the inclusion of benchmarks 
in consideration of termination of the RM’s authority to find incremental ways to return power to local control.  As to Defendants’ proposal, should the Court believe a broader consideration for reduction of the RM’s authority is necessary, the Court may want to 
consider the recent Hinds County Order.  In the Hinds Order, the Court ruled that, “Each year, the Receiver shall schedule a formal assessment with the Court, during which the Court will regularly assess progress under the Receivership and determine whether the 
Receiver’s duties should be modified or eliminated.” See U.S. v. Hinds Cnty., et al., 3:16-cv-00489 (S.D. Miss.), Dkt. 282-2, § V .  If the Court were to adopt such an approach in this case, the Court could consider if a similar type of assessment would be appropriate 
following the filing of the Monitor’s Reports or after a certain number of Monitor’s Reports (note, in Hinds County there will be no Monitor Reports during the duration of the receivership).  
Defendants’ Position: Defendants believe that the Court should re-evaluate the RM’s authority after any finding of improved compliance by the Monitor. To presume otherwise would allow the RM’s authority to continue past the time that it is necessary to remedy 
an ongoing constitutional violation, in violation of the PRLA. Even if one or two Courts have disregarded this requirement without consideration of the legal implications under the PLRA, that does not provide any significant authority that the practice could 
withstand legal scrutiny.  See Def. Supp. Objs. at 5-6. 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We strongly oppose. We fully expect that the Court will evaluate the information received from the Remediation Manager and the Monitoring Team to assess the effectiveness of all entities in the case.  We oppose, however, the proposed 
addition of this provision, because we do not think it necessary for the Court to make the findings therein described, and think it inadvisable to introduce another process regarding the RAP that will not result in any apparent change. The Court’s findings about 
Substantial Compliance – that trigger a transfer of authority back to Defendants, by contrast -- have clear utility. Additionally, there is already a built-in opportunity for the Court to assess whether progress is being made, in the Monitor’s reports. The Court is always, 
of course, free to take whatever action is appropriate in response to the information the Court is receiving— but requiring the Court to make intermittent findings is unnecessary and burdensome. Defendants’ proposed additional language will essentially require the 
Court to conduct a full hearing and make findings with respect to the 18 Contempt Provisions and progress under the RAP after each six-month Reporting Period.   
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 16 of 73
16 
Section IV: Powers of the Nunez Remediation Manager 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IV 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
Powers of the Nunez Remediation Manager. The 
Nunez Remediation Manager shall have all powers 
necessary to achieve Substantial Compliance with the 
Contempt Provisions, including but not limited to: 
 
Powers of the Nunez Remediation Manager. Beginning 
on the Acceptance Effective Date, tThe Nunez 
Remediation Manager shall have all powers necessary to 
achieve Substantial Compliance with the Contempt 
Provisions, including but not limited to: 
Powers of the Nunez Remediation Manager. The 
Nunez Remediation Manager shall have  allthe 
following  powers necessary to achieve Substantial 
Compliance with the Contempt Provisions, including 
but not limited to: 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There are two different proposals.  Plaintiffs’/SDNY proposal is opposed by Defendants.  The Defendants agree with the Monitoring Team’s proposal, but it is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY.   
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitor’s recommended language was intended to streamline this section.  The following provisions regarding General and Specific Powers both explain the powers are imposed because they are necessary to achieve 
Substantial Compliance. This provision appears to also potentially raise some ambiguity and inconsistency with the Court’s explanation in the May 13th Order (and provisions of this order) that it has placed certain limits on the authority of the RM and so “all” and 
“including but not limited to” did not appear consistent with the Court’s ruling.  For example, the Court explains the RM has the same authority as the Commissioner, but not that beyond that of the Commissioner without seeking and receiving approval from the 
Court for additional powers.  Another example in the Court’s May 13th Order explains “the Nunez Remediation Manager will not be empowered to unilaterally cancel or execute collective bargaining agreements, but will have the authority of the Commissioner in 
determining the DOC’ s needs and positions with respect to contract provisions relevant to remediation of the Contempt Provisions. This grant of power to the Remediation Manager is thus narrowly drawn, extends no further than necessary to correct the violation of 
the Contempt Provisions, and is the least intrusive means necessary to correct the violation of the Contempt Provisions as required by the PLRA.”  The proposed revisions are made to be consistent with the provision that permits the RM to seek additional power from 
the Court if it believes it is necessary to achieve Substantial Compliance, but the RM does not have an automatic grant of authority to have additional power beyond what is enumerated in the Order.  Accordingly, it does not appear accurate for the Order to state that 
the RM has all powers necessary to achieve Substantial Compliance, when the Court has explained that the grant of power is narrowly drawn and extends no further than necessary.  
 
With respect to Plaintiffs’/SDNY proposal, to the extent it is adopted by the Court and the Court also adopts the recommendation of the Monitor regarding acceptance date/start date (which is addressed Section XI of this order), we recommend the Court ensure that 
the clause about the Effective Date is reconciled with when the RM’s authority may be initiated.  We cross reference that here given Plaintiffs’/SDNY proposal.   
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants agree with the Monitor’s proposal and See Defs, Objs. SECTION IV: Powers of the Remediation Manager on pgs. 6-8.  This provision is intended to make more clear the Court’s stated intention that the “powers granted to the 
Nunez Remediation Manger” will not be “limited during the time period that the Remediation Action Plan is being developed.” In other words, the Remediation Manager’s authority begins on his first day on the job, not after the Remediation Action Plan is approved 
by the Court. This does not conflict with setting the “Acceptance Effective Date” for the date the RM actually begins work, rather than the date he indicates to the Court that he intends to take the position.  The RM can file his formal acceptance of the position on the 
docket on the day he actually starts the job.  Therefore, this provision does not conflict with the Monitor’s concern raised in the comment of 8/18/25. 
 
Plaintiffs/SDNY Positions: We propose adding “Beginning on the Acceptance Effective Date” to the beginning of this provision to make clear that the Remediation Manager’s authority commences at the time they begin the role, in accordance with the Court’s May 
13 Order. See Dkt. 846 at 44 (“To be clear, the responsibilities and authority of the Nunez Remediation Manager shall not be constrained by the particular stages of the Remediation Action Plan, nor are the powers granted to the Nunez Remediation Manager limited 
during the time period in which the Remediation Action Plan is being developed. Instead, the Remediation Manger shall at all times possess all of the necessary authority and responsibility to address non-compliance with the Contempt Provisions”). This clarification 
eliminates any doubt that the Remediation Manager has full authority from day one to respond to the current crisis, within the scope of this Order, and need not await further, likely protracted, negotiation and satellite litigation before getting to work. 
 
We object to the Monitor’s proposal and think the Court’s construction was clear, appropriate and should be maintained. We disagree with the Monitor’s legal argument that the Court’s original language offends the needs/narrowness/intrusiveness constraints of the 
PLRA. For the Court to grant all authority necessary to achieve compliance with the Contempt Provisions, and then to provide a non-exhaustive list of specific powers that reflect that authority, is entirely consistent with the PLRA. This construction is also consistent 
with grants of authority in other receivership orders. See Plata Receivership Order at 3; Doe v. Cook County Transitional Administrator Order at 4. We do not think the provision is reasonably read to confer unlimited powers, as the powers are already constrained 
throughout the Order. By contrast, the Monitor’s proposal will invite satellite litigation over whether actions fall within the specific grants of authority, which will slow the reform effort. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IV, A 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
General Powers: The Nunez Remediation Manager 
shall have the authority to exercise all powers vested by 
law in the Commissioner to the extent necessary to 
achieve compliance with the Contempt Provisions.  The 
Nunez Remediation Manager shall have such powers to 
control, oversee, supervise, and direct all administrative, 
personnel, financial, accounting, contracting, legal, and 
other operational functions of the DOC to the extent 
necessary to achieve compliance with the Contempt 
Provisions. 
General Powers: The Nunez Remediation Manager shall 
have the authority to exercise all powers vested by law in 
the Commissioner to the extent necessary to achieve 
complianceSubstantial Compliance with the Contempt 
Provisions.  The Nunez Remediation Manager shall have 
such powers of the Commissioner to control, oversee, 
supervise, and direct all administrative, personnel, 
financial, accounting, contracting, legal, and other 
operational functions of the DOC to the extent necessary 
to achieve compliance with the Contempt Provisions.  
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Order, such 
powers as are granted to the Nunez Remediation Manager 
by this Order shall be limited by the laws, rules and 
regulations of the City and State of New York, and the 
 
General Powers: The Nunez Remediation Manager 
shall have the authority to exercise all powers vested 
by law in the Commissioner to the extent necessary 
to achieve Substantial cCompliance with the 
Contempt Provisions.  The Nunez Remediation 
Manager shall have such powers to control, oversee, 
supervise, and direct all administrative, personnel, 
financial, accounting, contracting, legal, and other 
operational functions of the DOC to the extent 
necessary to achieve compliance with the Contempt 
Provisions. 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 17 of 73
17 
contracts and Collective Bargaining Agreements to which 
the City is a party, to the same extent as the authority of 
the Commissioner is so limited.  The mention of a power 
or authority in this Order does not imply that the power or 
authority is necessarily available to the Commissioner or 
the Nunez Remediation Manager if it is not otherwise 
available to the Commissioner under state or local law.   
Summary of Objections/Proposals: The Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose the proposal from Defendants.  Plaintiffs’/SDNY contend the language should remain as originally drafted. The Monitoring Team takes no position except to recommend the use of Substantial 
Compliance in this provision. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team defers to the Court and the Parties with respect to this revision except to recommend the use of Substantial Compliance in this provision. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs., SECTION IV: Powers of the Remediation Manager on pgs. 6-8 and Defs. Supp. Objs. at  at 7-9.  This umbrella limitation is intended to govern each and every power of the RM that is provided for in the Order. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position:  Regarding Defendants’  second proposed change (the addition of “of the Commissioner”), we oppose this revision because we think it unnecessary, as the section already makes clear that the Remediation Manager has the powers vested 
by law in the Commissioner. Should the Court think adding “of the Commissioner” is necessary, we do not object. 
 
We oppose the Defendants’ next change (deleting “financial, accounting, contracting, and legal”). As the organization chart provided by Defendants makes clear, the Commissioner does carry some authority in financial, accounting, contracting, and legal matters, and 
the Remediation Manger should carry that same level of authority. 
 
Finally, we oppose Defendants’ addition of the final two sentences as they are unnecessary. Orders are construed consistent with existing law. 
 
As to the Monitor’s and Defendants’ proposed change of “compliance” to “Substantial Compliance,” we do not think the change is necessary, but do not object should the Court prefer that construction. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IV, B 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
Specific Powers: Without in any way limiting the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s general powers detailed in 
Paragraph A above, the Nunez Remediation Manager 
shall have the authority to exercise the following specific 
powers to the extent necessary to achieve compliance 
with the Contempt Provisions, and to the extent vested 
by law in the Commissioner: 
Specific Powers: Without in any way limiting the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s general powers detailed in 
Paragraph A above, the Nunez Remediation Manager 
shall have the authority to exercise the following specific 
powers, solely to the extent that they: (i) are necessary to 
achieve compliance with the Contempt Provisions, and to 
the extent(ii) are vested by City and state law in the 
Commissioner. 
 
Specific Powers: Without in any way limiting the 
Nunez Remediation Manager’s general powers 
detailed in Paragraph A above, the Nunez 
Remediation Manager shall have the authority to 
exercise the following specific powers to the extent 
that they: (a) are necessary to achieve compliance 
with the Contempt Provisions, and to the extent(b) 
are vested by City and State law in the 
Commissioner:   
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants proposal is opposed by Plaintiffs/SDNY.  Plaintiffs/SDNY propose the language remain as is.  The Monitoring Team consents to Defendants’ proposal except for the use of the word “solely” of which the Monitoring 
Team takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team takes no position on “solely”, but consents to the additional text proposed by Defendants as we believe it brings necessary clarity to the provision.  
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Obs., SECTION IV: Powers of the Remediation Manager on pgs. 6-8 and Defs. Supp. Objs. at7-9.   
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY Position: We oppose. This language is unnecessary and the Court’s original language was clear. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IV, B, i 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall have the 
authority to enact or change DOC policies, procedures, 
protocols, systems, and practices implicated by the 
Court’s contempt findings. 
  
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall have the 
authority to enact or change DOC policies, 
procedures, protocols, systems, and practices 
implicated by the Court’s contempt findings. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection by the Parties and Monitoring Team to the removal of this text. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: We propose the deletion of this clause because the overarching paragraph explains the limitations on the RM’s power.  The addition of “implicated” suggests that there is an additional standard beyond what is necessary.  Further, it 
is unknown what is meant by “the Court’s contempt findings.”   
 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 18 of 73
18 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants agree. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We do not object to the Monitor’s recommendations. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IV, B, ii 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall have the 
authority to establish personnel policies and direct 
personnel actions.  The Nunez Remediation Manager 
shall have the power to create, modify, abolish, or 
transfer employee and contractor positions, as well as to 
recruit, hire, train, terminate, promote, demote, transfer, 
and evaluate employees and contractors.  The Nunez 
Remediation Manager shall have the authority to assign 
and deploy DOC staff. 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall have the authority 
to establish personnel policies and direct personnel 
actions.  The Nunez Remediation Manager shall have the 
power to create, modify, abolish, or transfer employee 
and contractor positions, as well as to recruit, hire, train, 
terminate, promote, demote, transfer, and evaluate 
employees and contractors.   
 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall have the authority 
to assign and deploy DOC staff as necessary to 
implement the Remediation Action Plan. 
  
Summary of Objections/Proposals: First, Defendants proposal this language is its own paragraph (versus maintaining it in the one above) and also add the additional clause as proposed by Defendants.  Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose both changes.  The Monitoring Team 
takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team defers to the Court and the Parties with respect to this revision. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs., SECTION IV: Powers of the Remediation Manager on pgs. 6-8; Defs. Supp. Objs. at 7-9.  Adding this limitation helps avoid ambiguity about whether a particular personnel action is necessary to achieve Substantial 
Compliance with a Contempt Provision, by requiring that it be related to a specific element of the RAP. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. We do not understand why “the authority to assign and deploy DOC staff” should be in a separate clause. In our view, putting that sentence into its own paragraph introduces confusion because the first two sentences remain 
linked and the last is offset into its own provision—a construction that implies that “the power to create, modify, abolish, or transfer e mployee and contractor positions, as well as to recruit, hire, train, terminate, promote, demote, transfer, and evaluate employees and 
contractors” is a personnel policy or personnel action, whereas “the authority to assign and deploy DOC staff” is not. In our view that is confusing and frankly incorrect. We think the Court’s original construction was the right one.  
 
We disagree with adding the clause “as necessary to implement the Remediation Action Plan” because the scope of the Remediation Manager’s specific powers is already properly defined as “to the extent necessary to achieve compliance with the Contempt 
Provisions” at the beginning of Section IV .B, and that scope should not be changed with regard to this specific power or any power. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IV, B, iii 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall have the 
authority to determine the DOC’s needs and positions 
with respect to contract provisions relevant to 
remediation of the Contempt Provisions. 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall have the authority 
to determine the DOC’s needs and positions with respect 
to contract provisions relevant to remediation of the 
Contempt Provisions. 
  
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants’ proposal is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY .  The Monitoring Team takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team defers to the Court and the Parties with respect to this revision. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs., SECTION IV: Powers of the Remediation Manager on pgs. 6-8; Defs, Supp. Objs. at 7-8. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. The Remediation Manager should have the ability to determine the agency’s position with respect to particular contractual provisions that relate to their powers, which could include the DOC’s recommendation/views on 
whether a particular contractual provision needs to be modified or renegotiated to achieve compliance. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IV, B, iv 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall have the 
authority to procure and contract for supplies, 
equipment, tangible goods, and services. 
   
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 19 of 73
19 
No proposed revisions or objections. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IV, B, v 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall have the 
authority to review, investigate, and take disciplinary or 
other corrective or remedial actions with respect to any 
violation of DOC policies, procedures, and protocols 
implicated by the Court’s contempt findings. 
  
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall have the 
authority to review, investigate, and take disciplinary 
or other corrective or remedial actions with respect to 
any violation of DOC policies, procedures, and 
protocols implicated by the Court’s contempt 
findings. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection by the Parties and Monitoring Team to the removal of this text. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: We propose the deletion of this clause because the overarching paragraph explains the limitations on the RM’s power.  The addition of “implicated” suggests that there is an additional standard beyond what is necessary.  Further, it 
is unknown what is meant by “the Court’s contempt findings.”   
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants agree. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We do not object to the Monitor’s recommendations. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IV, B, vii 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
In exercising the powers conferred by this Order, the 
Nunez Remediation Manager shall use reasonable best 
efforts to consult and work collaboratively with the 
Commissioner. 
   
No proposed revisions or objections. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IV, B, viii 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall have the 
authority to delegate any of these powers to the 
Commissioner and to retract or constrict such 
delegations as the Nunez Remediation Manager, in the 
Nunez Remediation Manager’s discretion, deems 
necessary. 
   
No proposed revisions or objections. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IV, C 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
Commissioner’s Role: The Commissioner shall retain 
all of Commissioner’s authority in areas not implicated 
by the Contempt Provisions.  The Commissioner and the 
Nunez Remediation Manager are urged and expected to 
work collaboratively in aid of the goals of compliance 
with the Nunez Orders and the safe, sustainable 
management of the jails.  The Nunez Remediation 
Manager shall have the authority to direct the 
Commissioner to take any steps that the Nunez 
Remediation Manager deems necessary to comply with 
the requirements of the Contempt Provisions.  It is 
  
Commissioner’s Role:  
 
[Two proposals for the first sentence]  
 
Defendants’ Proposal: 
The Commissioner shall retain all of Commissioner’s 
authority in areas not implicated by under the 
supervision and direction of the Nunez Remediation 
Manger, to the extent such supervision and direction 
is necessary to implement the Remediation Action 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 20 of 73
20 
expected that Defendants, and the Commissioner and 
DOC leadership, will work closely with the Nunez 
Remediation Manager to facilitate the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s ability to perform their duties 
under this Order. 
Plan or otherwise to achieve compliance with the 
Contempt Provisions.   
 
Plaintiffs’ Proposal: The Commissioner shall retain 
exclusive  all of Commissioner’s authority in areas 
that do not fall within implicated by the Contempt 
Provisions.] 
 
The Commissioner and the Nunez Remediation 
Manager are urged and expected to work 
collaboratively in aid of the goals of compliance with 
the Nunez Orders and the safe, sustainable 
management of the jails.  The Nunez Remediation 
Manager shall have the authority to direct the 
Commissioner to take any steps that the Nunez 
Remediation Manager deems necessary to comply 
with the requirements of the Contempt Provisions.  It 
is expected that Defendants, and the Commissioner 
and DOC leadership, will work closely with the 
Nunez Remediation Manager to facilitate the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s ability to perform their 
duties under this Order.  Nothing in this Order shall 
authorize the Nunez Remediation Manager to take 
any employment action with respect to the 
Commissioner. 
 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There are two different proposals from the Defendants and Plaintiffs’/SDNY with respect to the first sentence of the provision.  The Monitor takes no position on the different proposals, but notes it advised the parties the original 
construction of the language was confusing and so we recommended that revisions to this first sentence appeared necessary.  There is consent/no objection by the Parties and Monitoring Team with respect to the inclusion of the last sentence of the provision.  
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team advised the Parties that the original language was confusing and so revisions were necessary.  The Monitoring Team defers to the Court and the Parties with respect to the proposals. 
 
Defendants’ Position: The Commissioner must retain operational authority except subject to the RM’s supervision and direction in those areas relating to the Contempt Provisions. The Commissioner should not be excluded from exercising authority in overlapping 
areas, even if the RM may have superior authority in some respects in that area.  Defs. Maintain their objection to this language because the Commissioner must maintain authority to operate DOC so long as her actions are consistent with the RM’s lawful directions. 
If the Commissioner has no authority with respect to anything affecting Contempt Provision compliance, then the Commissioner would have unclear operational authority in virtually any operational context. Rather the Commissioner should retain authority, subject 
to supervision and direction by the RM in areas within the RM’s lawful purview. That is as workable as the relationship between the First Deputy Commissioner and the Commissioner, except for the ambiguous nature of the RM’s authority which remains under any 
scenario other than Defendants’ Compliance Director proposal. See also Defs. Objs., SECTION IV: Powers of the Remediation Manager on pgs. 6-8. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We strongly oppose Defendants’ proposal. First, the Remediation Action Plan should not be included in defining the Remediation Manager's role nor the Commissioner's role. Not only are the contents of the RAP currently unknown, but 
this Order clearly defines the Remediation Manager's authority and powers, and conflating the RAP with those powers is incorrect. Moreover, this language appears to introduce another standard to define the Remediation Manager’s authority: "to the extent such 
supervision and direction is necessary to...achieve compliance with the Contempt Provisions." This is confusing and unnecessary. We remain of the view that our construction is most appropriate. Further, we note that we think Defendants’ comments misapprehend 
the nature of a Remediation Manager remedy, and seek to neutralize it. The Commissioner cannot retain her authority in areas within the scope of the Remediation Manager, nor work only at the Remediation Manager’s “lawful directions.” Rather, the Remediation 
Manager must have full authority in those areas. We fully expect that the Remediation Manager will delegate to the Commissioner the authority to continue taking action in many areas, as the Court’s order already provides in § IV , ¶ B(viii). But acting pursuant to a 
delegation is not the equivalent of the Commissioner retaining authority. It is our understanding that this provision was included to make clear that the Commissioner will continue to have exclusive authority in operational areas that do not relate to the Contempt 
Provisions; our proposed edits are intended to make this more clear. 
 
We agree to the change regarding employment actions against the Commissioner. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IV, D 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
Additional Powers: The Nunez Remediation Manager 
may, after consultation with the Commissioner and the 
Monitoring Team, petition the Court on notice to the 
parties and the Monitoring Team for such additional 
powers as are necessary to achieve compliance with the 
Contempt Provisions consistent with Section II. 
  
Additional Powers: The Nunez Remediation 
Manager may, after consultation with the 
Commissioner, and the Monitoring Team, and the 
parties, petition the Court on notice to the parties and 
the Monitoring Team for such additional powers as 
are necessary to achieve compliance with the 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 21 of 73
21 
Contempt Provisions consistent with Section II. 
[Plaintiffs propose that “consistent with Section II” 
is removed] 
[Monitor’s Proposal: The Remediation Manager 
shall provide the position (which may include a 
request to be heard) of the parties and the Monitoring 
Team in any application to the Court.] 
[Defendants’ Proposal: The parties and the 
Monitoring Team shall have at least 20 business days 
to respond to any petition for additional powers by 
the Remediation Manager.] 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: The changes to the first sentence regarding the addition of the parties are on consent/no objection. Plaintiffs propose the clause “consistent with Section II” is removed.  Defendants oppose the removal and the Monitoring Team 
takes no position.  As for the last sentence, there are two different proposals for the last sentence.  With respect to the last sentence, Plaintiffs’/SDNY do not object to the proposal by the Monitor. The Monitor and Plaintiffs’/SDNY object to Defendants’ proposal.  On 
a formatting note, the Monitoring Team has proposed that the Additional Powers section has two subsections – this paragraph and the next one.  However, as noted below, Plaintiffs object to the second paragraph in this provision. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team recommends consultation with the Parties occurs as part of this process.  We take no position on the removal of “consistent with Section II.” We recommend adding the final sentence because it reflects the 
current practice in this case in which an application should reflect the positions of the Parties.  We think the RM would benefit from having the Parties’ guidance on what to include in the application and that the Court would benefit from knowing the position of the 
Parties and the Monitoring Team when the application is submitted.  Given the variety of processes in this case, we think affirmatively stating the information that should be included in the application is helpful.  We appreciate that the position of a party may be that 
they oppose the application or otherwise wish to have an opportunity to be heard by the Court, which is why we explain that the position could be that they wish to be heard.  However, with respect to the Defendants’ proposal, we think presumptively setting a 
schedule for responses to the application assumes that the Parties will inherently disagree and briefing will be necessary.  For instance, the application could be made on consent of all parties and the Monitoring Team.  Given the type of request and the position of the 
parties is not yet known, presumptively setting a briefing schedule does not seem necessary or appropriate and, in fact, may invite litigation when it may not be needed and there is consensus amongst all parties and the Monitoring Team.   
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants do not object to the recommendations of the Monitor in the first sentence.  With respect to the final sentence, Defendants object to the proposed last sentence by the Monitor and instead prefer its construction as outlined in the 
Defendants’ objections.  See Def. Obs., SECTION IV: Powers of the Remediation Manager on pgs. 6-8; Defs. Supp. Objs. at 7 n, 6. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We consent to the Monitor’s revisions. The Court has provided the parties the opportunity to propose modifications to the Court’s Proposed Order Appointing Nunez Remediation Manager; similarly, in Section II, ¶ A(i) of the proposed 
Order, the Court outlines a process by which the Remediation Manager is required to solicit and consider comment from the parties on the draft Remediation Action Plan. In line with this critical practice of consultation with the parties, the Nunez Remediation 
Manager should be required to consult with the parties (not just the Commissioner and the Monitoring Team) before seeking to modify the scope of their powers under the Order. We do not think the last sentence added by the Monitor (requiring the Remediation 
Manager to provide the positions of the parties in any application to the Court) is necessary, but if the Court thinks it helpful we do not oppose it.  
 
We oppose Defendants’ proposal to add the last sentence. We agree with the Monitor that this Order need not predetermine a briefing schedule about an unknown issue of unknown complexity. 
 
Finally, we suggest omitting “consistent with Section II” from this provision, because we found the reference to Section II to be confusing. This provision deals specifically with applications to the Court for additional powers of the Remediation Manager, while 
Section II governs the development and implementation of the Remediation Action Plan, which does not define the scope of the Remediation Manager’s powers. We therefore recommend removing the reference to Section II.  
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in § IV  
 
[Previously in § XI, B 
 
Other Terms] 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall make reasonable 
efforts to exercise their authority in a manner consistent 
with applicable state and local laws, regulations, and 
contracts.  However, in the event the Nunez Remediation 
Manager determines that those laws, regulations, or 
contracts impede the Nunez Remediation Manager from 
carrying out their duties under this Order and achieving 
compliance with the Contempt Provisions, the Nunez 
Remediation Manager may petition the Court to waive 
any legal or contractual requirement that is causing the 
impediment or seek other appropriate relief on notice to 
the parties and the Monitoring Team. 
  
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall make 
reasonable efforts to exercise their authority in a 
manner consistent with applicable state and local 
laws, regulations, and contracts.  However, in the 
event the Nunez Remediation Manager determines 
that those laws, regulations, or contracts impede the 
Nunez Remediation Manager from carrying out their 
duties under this Order and achieving compliance 
with the Contempt Provisions, the Nunez 
Remediation Manager may,  after consultation with 
the Commissioner and the Monitoring Team, and the 
parties, petition the Court on notice to the parties and 
the Monitoring Team, to waive any legal or 
contractual requirement that is causing the 
impediment or seek other appropriate relief on notice 
to the parties and the Monitoring Team. 
[Monitor’s Proposal: The Nunez Remediation 
Manager shall provide the position (which may 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 22 of 73
22 
include a request to be heard) of the parties and the 
Monitoring Team in any application to the Court.] 
[Defendants’ Proposal: The parties and the 
Monitoring Team shall have at least 20 business days 
to respond to any petition for additional powers by 
the Remediation Manager.] 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: The Monitoring Team proposes moving this paragraph from the Other Terms section which Defendants agree to, but is opposed by Plaintiffs.  As for the substantive changes to the text, the proposed language at the end of the 
sentence “However” is on consent/no objection.  As for the proposal at the end of the paragraph, the Monitoring Team proposes one construction which Plaintiffs explain is not necessary.  The Monitoring Team and the Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose the Defendants’ 
proposal. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: First, the Monitoring Team recommends this provision about the obligations of the RM’s authority as well as potential application for additional power makes most sense in this section versus in the other terms section of this Order. 
The Monitoring Team recommends consultation with the Commissioner, the Monitoring Team, and the Parties as part of this process, which is required for the additional powers provision (above) and we think this same consultation is useful in this context as well.  
We added the final sentence because it reflects the current practice in this case in which an application should reflect the positions of the Parties.  We think the RM would benefit from having guidance from the Commissioner, Monitoring Team, and Parties on what to 
include in the application and that the Court would benefit from knowing the position of the Parties and the Monitoring Team when the application is submitted.  Given the variety of processes in this case, we think affirmatively stating the information that should be 
included in the application is helpful.  We appreciate that the position of a party may be that they wish to have an opportunity to be heard by the Court which is why we explain that the position could be that they wish to be heard.  However, with respect to the 
Defendants’ proposal, we think presumptively setting a schedule for responses to the application assumes that the application will be opposed and briefing is necessary.  Given the type of request and the position of the parties is not yet known, presumptively setting a 
briefing schedule does not seem necessary or appropriate and, in fact, may invite litigation when it may not be needed and there is consensus amongst all parties and the Monitoring Team.   
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants do not object to moving this provision or the additional text that appears before the bracketed text of “Monitor’s Proposal.”  Defendants object to the text in the Monitor’s Proposal bracket and ask the Court include the text proposed 
by Defendants. Defendants believe that any contested application for an order to preempt local or state law must be fully litigated under the PLRA and constitutional standards, and 20 business days is the minimum time necessary to respond to such a weighty 
application. There should be no suggestion that an Order superseding state or local sovereignty could be issued without a full and fair opportunity to be heard. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose moving this provision from “Other Terms.” We think the Court was correct to position this provision here, rather than in Section IV , because an application to the Court for waiver of a state or local law is not a “power.” 
Section IV deals generally with the Remediation Manager’s operational authorities, which is different. We think this should remain in “Other Terms” as its own paragraph. 
 
We agree with the Monitor’s revisions to the second sentence regarding consultation with the Monitor, the Commissioner, and the parties, as well as the notice requirements. Again, we do not think it necessary for this Order to require the Remediation Manager to 
provide the parties’ positions in applications to the Court, but if the Court thinks such a requirement would be helpful, we do not oppose it. We oppose Defendants’ proposal to include a predetermined briefing schedule for an unknown issue of unknown complexity, 
and agree with the Monitor’s view. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IV, B, vi 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall have the 
authority to hire consultants, or obtain technical 
assistance, as the Nunez Remediation Manager deems 
necessary to perform their duties under this Order. 
  
Authority to Hire Staff and Consultants: The 
Nunez Remediation Manager shall have the authority 
to  
[Defendants’ proposal: request the Court’s 
permission to]  
 
hire additional qualified staff, consultants, or obtain 
technical assistance, 
 
 [Defendants’ proposal: for the Remediation 
Manager Team (as defined below)]  
 
as is reasonably necessary to fulfill the Nunez 
Remediation Manager duties under this Order 
without duplication of effort, as the Nunez 
Remediation Manager deems necessary to perform 
their duties under this Order.  The Nunez 
Remediation Manager shall reasonably utilize the 
Department assets and resources it already possesses.  
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall take all 
necessary steps to minimize redundancy and the 
creation of additional bureaucracy with the goal of 
creating systems that support the sustainable 
transition back to the Defendants’ control. 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 23 of 73
23 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: The provision has been moved to its own section on consent/no objection by the Parties and Monitoring Team.  With respect to the changes to the text in the provision, the Monitoring Team has proposed revisions.  Defendants 
agree to the Monitor’s changes and have two additional changes on top of the Monitor’s proposal that are highlighted in yellow. The Monitoring Team takes no position on the Defendants’ additions to the Monitor’s proposal. The entirety of the Monitoring Team’s 
proposal is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY .   
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: First, these revisions were made to reconcile the inconsistency between this provision and § VIII, A (which states “The Nunez Remediation Manager may hire or consult with such additional qualified staff as is reasonably necessary 
to fulfill their duties pursuant to this Order without duplication of effort.”).  The requirement in § VIII, A is similar, but slightly different to the one in this provision.  We think the Order should be clear in this respect and that two separate provisions in different parts 
of the Order are confusing and create unnecessary ambiguity.  Second, the additional language was included to address the Court’s five enumerated goals for this Order as stated in the Court’s May 13, 2025 Order at pg. 19.  As the Court explained in its May 13, 2025 
Order, the Order itself must be constructed in a manner to advance the very goals of the Remediation Manager.  As drafted, the Order does not currently include any provisions that require the RM to limit additional bureaucracy and, in fact, the only potential check 
on the development of the RM Team is for Defendants to object to fees.  In the Monitoring Team’s view, that does not adequately reinforce the Court’s stated goals for the RM and the RM Team to support achieving Substantial Compliance in a quick and sustainable 
manner.  The Monitoring Team’s assessment of the limited number of Receiverships in the jail/prison context reinforces the need for the Order to provide such clarity. 
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants’ agree with the Monitor’s proposal with the addition of “to request to.” with the understanding that this paragraph is intended to refer solely to adding to the Remediation Manager Team, the Defendants additional language reflects 
the position that the RM should make a request to the Court to hire additional personnel, if not previously approved by the Court.  That position is explained in Defendants’ submission regarding selection of the Remediation Manager and in Defendants Objections 
and proposed changes regarding the Remediation Manager fees and costs.   
 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We object, and think the Court’s original construction was correct. We think the Monitor’s proposed language unnecessary for this Order. The Court is appointing this professional to exercise judgment about what is necessary to perform 
their duties, which include ensuring Defendants reach Substantial Compliance and then returning authority to Defendants in a sustainable way. This additional language is superfluous and overly prescriptive. In addition, the Order as drafted allows Defendants to 
object and raise with the Court any expenditures they deem unnecessary. We likewise disagree that the “only potential check on the development of the RM Team is for Defendants to object to fees.” The Remediation Manager Team’s staffing and consultant 
relationships will be reported publicly and to the Court by, at minimum, the Remediation Manager and the Monitor. Should Defendants or any party have concerns that the development of the Remediation Manager Team is in some way unreasonable, the parties may 
raise the matter with the Court. Most importantly, the Court can at any time seek clarity from or direct the Remediation Manager regarding any concerns the Court has, as they are an agent of the Court.  Further, all of this superfluous language will likely only lead to 
litigation down the road and allow the City to challenge actions taken by the Remediation Manager and litigate issues like whether the Remediation Manager is “reasonably utiliz[ing] the Department assets and resources it already possesses.”  Additional litigation 
will only stall the reform efforts. 
 
For similar reasons, we also object to Defendants’ proposed additions requiring the Remediation Manager to seek permission every time they seek to hire staff, consultants, or obtain technical assistance. If Defendants are concerned about fees and expenses related to 
the Remediation Manager’s team, the Court’s order already provides appropriate mechanisms for them to raise those concerns in Proposed Order § VIII(A). 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IV, E 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
Access: The Nunez Remediation Manager, including all 
of their staff and consultants, shall have unlimited access 
to all records and files (paper or electronic) maintained 
by the DOC and shall have unlimited access to all DOC 
facilities, incarcerated people, and DOC staff.  This 
access includes the authority to conduct confidential 
interviews with DOC staff and incarcerated people.  The 
Nunez Remediation Manager’s ability to interview DOC 
staff shall be subject to the employee’s right to 
representation under certain circumstances as set forth in 
Section 75 of the New York Civil Service Law and 
MEO-16. 
  
Access: The Nunez Remediation Manager, including 
all of their staff and consultants, (collectively 
referred to as the “Remediation Manager Team”) 
shall have unlimited access to all records and files 
(paper or electronic) maintained by the DOC and 
shall have unlimited access to all DOC facilities, 
incarcerated people, and DOC staff.  This access 
includes the authority to conduct confidential 
interviews with DOC staff and incarcerated people.  
The Nunez Remediation Manager’sManager Team’s 
ability to interview DOC staff shall be subject to the 
employee’s right to representation under certain 
circumstances as set forth in Section 75 of the New 
York Civil Service Law and MEO-16. Access to 
records should not include access to communications 
between and among DOC personnel and the New 
York City Law Department that are protected by the 
attorney-client or work-product privileges. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection by the Parties and Monitoring Team to the proposed revisions. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: First, the Monitor recommends that the Remediation Manager Team is defined for clarity. This is the first reference to the RM Team which is why the definition appears here.  To the extent that the other proposed changes may alter 
the order, we recommend the RM Team is defined the first time it is addressed in the order.  Second, the final sentence is recommended based on feedback from Defendants.  We understand that Plaintiffs’/SDNY do not oppose. 
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants agree to this change. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We consent to this revision. 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 24 of 73
24 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§ IV 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
 
Nothing in this Order shall be construed to authorize the 
Nunez Remediation Manager to take any action that is 
beyond the remedial powers of the federal courts, or to 
authorize the Nunez Remediation Manager or the Court 
to order the construction of prisons or the raising of taxes, 
or to repeal or detract from otherwise applicable 
limitations on the remedial powers of the courts. 
  
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants’ proposal is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY .  The Monitor takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team defers to the Court and the Parties with respect to this revision. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Def. Objs. SECTION IV: Powers of the Remediation Manager on pgs. 6-8. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. It is not necessary to insert the PLRA’s statutory language into this Order. There is nothing in this Order to suggest that Remediation Manager has the authority to build new jails or raise taxes, and the inclusion of the 
proposed language will only create confusion. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§ IV 
 
Powers of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
 
Relief from Unlawful Actions of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager.  The City may seek equitable 
relief from the Court to the extent that it reasonably 
believes that the Nunez Remediation Manager has 
exceeded, or intends to exceed, their authority as set forth 
by this Order or under other federal, state or local law, or 
that the Nunez Remediation Manager is or intends to 
enact a policy or practice or take an action that is 
unconstitutional or is likely to cause constitutional 
violations.  A present or former employee of the City who 
has been or will be harmed by termination of their 
employment or disciplinary action of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager may also seek such relief.  This 
remedy shall not be exclusive to other remedies or relief 
from actions of the Nunez Remediation Manager 
otherwise available under federal, state or local law. 
  
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants proposal is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY .  The Monitor takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team defers to the Court and the Parties with respect to this revision. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs., SECTION IV: Powers of the Remediation Manager on pgs. 6-8.  To avoid any ambiguity about the specific sort of adverse action contemplated, limiting it to termination or disciplinary action. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. There is no need to specify that Defendants may seek relief from this Court where appropriate. Further, this Order should not create a new (and likely unworkable) federal right of action for all present and former City 
employees who feel that they have been “harmed by termination of their employment or disciplinary action” by the Remediation Manager—the latter category likely involving a very large number of potential actions given the level of misconduct identified for us e-
of-force-related discipline by DOC and the Monitor. This language would require this Court to handle all applications for such relief brought by any City employee. 
 
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 25 of 73
25 
Section V: Reporting by the Nunez Remediation Manager 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ V, A 
 
Reporting by the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall regularly report 
to and meet with the Court to update the Court regarding 
the status of efforts to comply with Contempt Provisions, 
and any specific obstacles or impediments encountered 
by the Nunez Remediation Manager. 
   
No proposed revisions or objections. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ V, B 
 
Reporting by the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
Within 60 days of the date of the Acceptance Effective 
Date, the Nunez Remediation Manager shall, in 
consultation with the Monitoring Team, propose for the 
Court’s approval a specific schedule for the submission 
of regular written reports to be filed on the public docket. 
 
Within 60 days of the date of the Acceptance Effective 
Date, the Nunez Remediation Manager shall, in 
consultation with the Monitoring Team, propose for 
the Court’s approval a specific schedule for the 
submission of regular written reports to be filed on the 
public docket. 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall file bi-annual 
reports on the Court’s docket (“RM Reports”). The 
RM reports shall include a description of the actions 
that the Remediation Manager Team has taken 
during the Reporting Period to implement the 
Remediation Action Plan, including achieving 
Substantial Compliance with the Benchmarks and 
Contempt Provisions. 
i. The RM Reports shall be filed in 
advance of the Monitor’s Report with 
the respective compliance assessment 
for a particular Reporting Period.  The 
Nunez Remediation Manager shall, in 
consultation with the Monitoring Team, 
propose for the Court’s approval a 
specific schedule for the submission of 
regular written reports to be filed on the 
public docket. 
ii. The Nunez Remediation Manager may 
also file additional reports with the 
Court, if necessary, upon notice to the 
parties and the Monitor. 
i.iii. The information contained in any report 
by the Nunez Remediation Manager is 
not an assessment of compliance 
pursuant to § XX, ¶ 18 of the Consent 
Judgment. To the extent a report by the 
Nunez Remediation Manager includes 
commentary or information with respect 
to status of compliance with a 
Benchmark or a Contempt Provision, 
such commentary and information are 
advisory and does not displace the 
authority of the Monitor to assess 
compliance under this or any other 
Order of this Court. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There are two different proposals.  Plaintiffs/SDNY propose a revision to the text from the Court’s original order.  The Monitoring Team proposes a number of revisions to this provision, which the Defendants do not object, but 
are opposed by the Plaintiffs/SDNY .   
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 26 of 73
26 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitor recommends that a common understanding of what will be included in the RM reports is important to include in the Order, as it has been provided for Defendants and the Monitoring Team.  With respect to the content 
of the reports of the RM order, it is our understanding that Defendants do not oppose.  The Monitoring Team has adopted the language proposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY with the exception that the Monitor’s configuration includes the requirement that compliance must 
be achieved with the Benchmarks as the Court has drafted in its order.  If the Court determines that compliance with the Benchmarks is not necessary, then this language should be revised accordingly.  Otherwise, the language as drafted is most appropriate.   
With respect to the scheduling of reports, we believe that the concerns raised by the Plaintiffs’/SDNY are addressed with the language we proposed.  The process and import of the Monitor Reports (and compliance reports) is set and the RM reports must necessarily 
be filed in advance of the Monitor Reports.  The Monitor expects to be in routine discussion with the RM as it is with Defendants.  That does not alter the need for any formal reporting to occur in advance of any filing of the Monitor Report.  In fact, any other 
approach would inhibit and possibly delay determinations regarding findings of the Court.  As noted by the Court, given the import of returning control of the jails back to Defendants as soon as possible, we think it is necessary the RM reports occur before the 
Monitor Reports and necessary latitude is provided to determine that timing. 
With respect to (iv), Defendants proposed and the Monitor adopted language to clarify the distinction between reports from the RM and the Monitor.  We believe such clarity benefits the process and does not cause confusion, but in fact supports clarity between roles. 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants do not object to this proposal. 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We think the Court’s original language for this provision was clear and would oppose changing it.  
We object to changing the Court’s original language regarding scheduling the Remediation Manager’s Reports.  The Court’s Proposed Order which has the Remediation Manager propose a schedule after consulting with the Monitor, allows the Remediation Manager 
as a professional to discuss with the Monitoring Team what the advisable structure should be and propose such a structure for the Court’s approval. All of these concerns can and should be aired during that process. The Court’s language in this and other provisions 
rightfully allows for the possibility that the Remediation Manager could have helpful thoughts about how to structure processes, and indeed should be a partner in creating them. 
Regarding the language in the second sentence, we think the description of what is to be contained in the Remediation Manager reports should be clearly distinguishable from the information to be contained in the Monitor reports, given the distinct roles. If the Order 
here is more detailed, we suggest: “a description of the actions that the Nunez Remediation Manager has taken during the Reporting Period to implement the Remediation Action Plan, meet the benchmarks, and achieve Substantial Compliance with the Contempt 
Provisions.” The language the Monitor proposes indicates that the Remediation Manager is attempting to achieve Substantial Compliance with benchmarks, which, as we noted elsewhere, we think should not be rated in the same way that Contempt Provisions are. 
With respect to the Monitoring Team’s legitimate concerns about having necessary information to prepare its reports, we expect the Remediation Manager and the Monitoring Team will be conferring and exchanging information on a regular basis outside of the 
public reporting process. 
 
With respect to (ii), we object. The Remediation Manager may of course file reports with the Court whenever they deem it necessary and this Order need not specifically say so—indeed, the Consent Judgment has no such provision for the Monitor, and rightfully so. 
The Monitor and the Remediation Manager are both agents of the Court and may exercise their judgment on when a public filing outside of the reporting schedule is appropriate. Second, the Remediation Manager need not be ordered to advise the parties or the 
Monitor before filing a report. The Monitor is likewise under no such obligation. 
 
With respect to (iii), we object. Again, we do not think this additional language is necessary and are concerned it will lead to confusion. We do not agree that the Remediation Manager's report is necessarily “advisory.” The Remediation Manager is tasked with 
running functions of an agency, and their report carries whatever weight the Court determines it does, as does the Monitor's. We understand that the Monitor may be concerned about clarity regarding who assesses compliance, but the Court's Order is already clear on 
that point: that the Monitor's role remains unchanged, and that the Monitor's reports assess compliance with the Contempt Provisions. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§ V 
 
Reporting by the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
   
The Remediation Manger’s Reports shall be written 
with due regard for the privacy interests of 
individuals in custody and Staff Members; federal, 
state, and local laws regarding the privacy of such 
information; and the interests of the Department in 
protecting against the disclosure of non-public or 
privileged information. Consistent with such interests 
and laws, the Nunez Remediation Manager shall 
redact individual-identifying information from the 
Remediation Manager’s Reports and any documents 
submitted with those Reports, and shall give due 
consideration to the Department’s requests to redact 
any other information. To the extent the Nunez 
Remediation Manager declines to make redactions 
requested by the Department, the Remediation 
Manager’s Report and any documents submitted with 
that report shall be submitted to the Court under seal 
for the Court to consider the Department’s proposed 
redactions before making the Remediation 
Manager’s Report public. 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 27 of 73
27 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection to this new provision. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: This language is modeled off Consent Judgment, § XX, ¶ 17 regarding the Monitor’s Reports.  These are sensible considerations for public filings and should apply to the RM Reports. 
 
 Defendants’ Position: Defendants consent. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We do not oppose. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§ V 
 
Reporting by the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
   
The Remediation Manager Reports shall not be 
admissible against Defendants in any proceeding 
other than a proceeding relating to the enforcement 
of the Nunez Orders. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants consent to the Monitor’s proposal, which is opposed by the Plaintiffs’/SDNY . 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: This provision is consistent with Consent Judgment § XIX, ¶ 3 and § XX, ¶ 21, which preclude the admissibility of the Department’s compliance reports and the Monitor’s reports in cases outside of Nunez.  For the same reasons the 
Department’s compliance report and the Monitor’s reports are not admissible in other proceedings, the same should apply to the RM’s reports.  It is unclear how or why the RM reports can or should be treated differently then the other reports in this case.  There are 
legitimate reasons the other reports in this case cannot be used in matters outside of Nunez that equally apply to the RM’s work.  There does not appear to be a basis to suggest that the work of the RM, which is intended to advance compliance with the Court’s Orders, 
should be treated any differently from Defendants’ compliance reports in this case. We don’t disagree with Plaintiffs’/SDNY that the RM and Monitor serve different functions, but we don’t think that because the Monitor and RM serve different functions that the RM 
reports may be used in cases outside of Nunez. In fact, we think any other construction undermines the Court’s efforts to increase and encourage collaboration between Defendants and the RM (and their team) as it can inherently create skepticism and other disputes.  
The fact that the reports may be used in the context outside of this case may also impact the RM’s work and what the RM may elect to report on.  The goal is to limit outside influence and allowing for the possibility that these reports may have broader impact beyond 
this case may in turn place pressures on the RM outside of this case.  Further, we note the importance of ensuring that the RM is focused on the work of Nunez and is not distracted.  This proposal helps to limit the possibility of distraction of matters outside the scope 
of Nunez, limits outside influence over the work of the RM, and reduces the possibility of additional costs that may be needed to address matters outside the scope of this case.  
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants consent to this language. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. The judge in the action where such evidence is being submitted should decide admissibility, not this Court, subject to the applicable rules of evidence. The Remediation Manager has different responsibilities than the Monitor, 
and there may be significant reasons for a court to treat their reports differently. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ V, C 
 
Reporting by the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall remain in contact 
with the Court throughout the Nunez Remediation 
Manager’s tenure on an informal, as needed, basis. 
   
No proposed revisions or objections. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§ V 
 
Reporting by the Nunez 
Remediation Manager 
   
The Remediation Manager Team shall cooperate 
fully with the Monitor and shall share information 
that the Monitor needs to fulfill his role and 
responsibilities. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection by the Parties and Monitoring Team to this new provision.  Plaintiffs/SDNY note that this language is included in the subsequent provision. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: Cooperation with the Monitor is critical and the Monitor’s access to information from the RM is critical to this cooperation. The order is otherwise silent as to this matter, so we recommend this language to eliminate any ambiguity 
as to the Monitor’s access to information from the RM. 
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants agree. 
 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 28 of 73
28 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We consent.  Note, Plaintiffs propose that this provision is included with the provision regarding consultation and cooperation with the Monitor. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in § V 
 
[Previously in § VI, C 
 
Role of the Monitor] 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall regularly consult 
with the Monitoring Team in the same manner as the 
Defendants are required to consult with the Monitoring 
Team under the Nunez Orders.  Such consultation shall 
also include consultation on progress that has been made 
in fulfilling the Remediation Action Plan and how to 
address potential obstacles to achieving compliance, as 
well as the strategies to achieve Substantial Compliance 
with the Contempt Provisions.   
  
The Nunez Remediation Manager Team  shall 
regularly communicate and consult with the 
Monitoring Team in the same manner as the 
Defendants are required to consult with the 
Monitoring Team under the Nunez Orders 
(including, but not limited to June 13, 2025 Order § 
I, ¶ 5).  Such consultation shall also include pro-
active consultation on progress that has been made in 
fulfilling the Remediation Action Plan, and how to 
address potential obstacles to achieving compliance, 
as well as the strategies to achieve Substantial 
Compliance with the Benchmarks and Contempt 
Provisions. 
 
The Remediation Manager Team may also seek 
information or technical assistance from the 
Monitoring Team in the same manner as Defendants 
under the Nunez Court Orders (including, but not 
limited to Consent Judgment, § XX, ¶¶ 24 and 25). 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection to the Monitor’s proposal in these revisions except: (1) Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose the inclusion of the text in parentheticals in the first and second paragraph.  Defendants agree to the Monitor’s 
proposal for the text in parentheticals, (2) Plaintiffs’ oppose the inclusion of the phrase “pro-active” and Defendants’ agree, and (3) Plaintiffs oppose the inclusion of “Benchmarks and” in the second sentence of the first paragraph, and (4) the final provision is 
proposed by the Monitoring Team and Defendants agree. Plaintiffs report they do not object, but would propose different language for the text in the parenthetical.  Finally, Plaintiffs’ propose the text regarding the RM’s obligation to cooperate with the Monitor is 
included in this provision.  The Monitoring Team and Defendants propose it is a standalone paragraph.   
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitor recommends this provision is moved to this section because it relates to the work of the RM versus the role of the Monitor, so it is better suited for this provision. The first set of edits are just to clarify that this 
provision applies equally to the RM Team (versus just the RM).  Given the breadth of Nunez Court Orders, we believe providing a cross reference to specific provisions is useful, in particular since some of these have been subject to multiple contempt proceedings.  
We note the inclusion of “pro-active” is consistent with the Court’s orders and believe it provides consistency with the consultation requirements. We have also included a reference to the Benchmarks as we believe that this was intended and likely inadvertently 
excluded.  With respect to the additional language proposed at the end of the provision, we believe clarity about how the RM may engage the Monitoring Team for information is also necessary to reaffirm the RM may seek information or technical assistance like 
Defendants are able to seek. 
 
 Defendants’ Position: Defendants agree with the changes. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We object to the addition of “Benchmarks and” in the first paragraph for the reasons we have stated in our comments on other provisions—that benchmarks should not be rated, only Contempt Provisions. We consent to the revisions to 
the first sentence but for the added parenthetical, which we believe unnecessary. We also object to adding “proactive,” because we think that is unnecessary and implied in the requirement to consult. We see no reason to depart from the language used in other 
requirements to consult, which does not include that word, and think it would be confusing to do so here. 
Regarding the second paragraph, we believe it unnecessary but if the Court determines the addition is helpful, we do not object. We note that we think the parenthetical in the second paragraph is confusing, and think it should read “in the same manner as Defendants 
may under Consent Judgment, § XX, ¶¶ 24 and 25.” 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in § V 
 
[Previously in  
§ VI 
 
Role of the Monitor] 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall obtain the 
Monitor’s approval to the extent it is required by the 
Contempt Provisions in the Nunez Orders. 
 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall obtain the 
Monitor’s approval to the extent it is required by the 
Contempt Provisions in the Nunez Orders. 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall obtain the 
Monitor’s approval (governed by Consent Judgment 
§ XX, ¶ 26) to the extent it is required by the 
Contempt Provisions in the Nunez Orders. To the 
extent that the Monitor does not provide such 
approval, the Nunez Remediation Manager may raise 
the matter with the Court and must provide the good 
faith basis for why approval should be granted 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 29 of 73
29 
despite the Monitor’s decision not to do so.  The 
Nunez Remediation Manager shall provide 
reasonable notice to the Monitor and the parties 
before making any such application to the Court and 
the parties and the Monitor shall have an opportunity 
to be heard on any such application.  [Defendants’ 
Proposal: The parties shall have at least 20 business 
days to respond to the Nunez Remediation 
Manager’s application pursuant to this provision, 
prior to the Court entering any Order in response to 
the application.] 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: The Defendants consent to the Monitoring Team’s proposal with one addition. Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose the Monitoring Team’s position. The Defendants and Monitoring Team oppose the Plaintiffs’ proposal.  The Monitor 
proposes an alternative to its proposal in the comments below in response to the Plaintiffs’/SDNY feedback (also discussed below).  Defendants oppose the Monitor’s alternative approach described in the comments. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: Approval of the Monitor is required explicitly in two Contempt Provisions - Consent Judgment, § IV , ¶ 1 and First Remedial Order, § A, ¶ 4.  The Monitoring Team believes that seeking approval of the Monitor is necessary and 
consistent with the Court’s May 13th Order, which repeatedly reinforces the need and importance of addressing recommendations from the Monitor.  As background, we propose inclusion of the cross reference to the Consent Judgment provision governing the 
Monitor’s approval.  As required by the Consent Judgment, approval may not be “unreasonably withheld” and “may only be withheld when the Monitor reasonably believes that the Department’s proposal is not consistent with the terms of the Agreement or the 
purpose of the relevant provision(s) and the requirements set forth in such provision(s).”  With respect to the second proposed edit to remove the clause “the Contempt Provisions in”, this edit is recommended because the clause appears to create some ambiguity since 
there are certain Contempt Provisions which are related to Non-Contempt Provisions for which the Monitor’s approval is required. Finally, with respect to the proposed language at the end of the provision, the Monitoring Team believes that the standard upon which 
the Monitor’s approval may be withheld is clear and should not result in any disputes with the Remediation Manager.  However, given the unique role of the Remediation Manager, we propose a process to address any potential disputes regarding the Monitor’s 
inability to provide approval should the situation arise.  We believe that in the main, this provision reinforces the need for the RM to collaborate with the Monitor.  The Monitor expects a rare circumstance in which approval is withheld, but, as required by the Order, 
if it is, it would be for very important reasons. 
 
The Monitoring Team strongly objects to the Plaintiffs’/SDNY current proposal which proposes removal of the Court’s explicit requirement that the RM seek approval of the Monitor and suggests that the Order stay silent as to whether the RM must seek approval 
from the Monitor even though it is explicitly required in two of the Contempt Provisions.  While we don’t believe it was intended, the Plaintiffs’/SDNY proposal appears to implicitly suggest that the RM should ignore the explicit requirement of two of the Contempt 
Provisions which require approval of the Monitor or somehow otherwise read a different provision of the Order to suggest that certain explicit portions of the Contempt Provisions do not apply to the RM.  We do not think that there should be any circumstance in this 
case in which an explicit provision of an already-existing order should simply be ignored or require reading multiple provisions together to determine its meaning.  If the Court determines that the RM does not need to seek approval of the Monitor, then the Order 
must be explicitly state that approval of the Monitor is not required and the processes in place in such cases.  Silence on such matters (or apparently suggesting that separate provisions of this order read in conjunction with the Contempt Provisions alter the plain 
meaning of the Contempt Provisions) sets an untenable and troubling precedent that explicit requirements of the Nunez Order do not need to be followed by the RM and, by extension, such logic could apply to other stakeholders and the parties.  
 
The Plaintiffs’/SDNY appear to suggest that the RM should attempt to seek agreement with the Monitor even if approval of the Monitor is not required and that a process be put is put in place if the RM and Monitor cannot agree. However, Plaintiffs’/SDNY do not 
propose how this disagreement is addressed, which triggers the concern noted above regarding the need to address explicit requirements in the Contempt Provisions.  While the Monitor believes the Court correctly requires the RM to seek approval of the Monitor, the 
Monitor proposes the following alternative language should the Court determine approval of the Monitor by the RM is not necessary: “The Nunez Remediation Manager does not need to obtain the Monitor’s approval for those Contempt Provisions that require 
Monitor approval.  However, the Nunez Remediation Manager shall take all reasonable steps to achieve consensus with the Monitor regarding matters that would otherwise require the Monitor’s approval.  To the extent necessary, the Remediation Manager or the 
Monitor may raise the matter with the Court and provide the good-faith basis for why the Department should proceed despite the fact that consensus with the Monitor could not be achieved. The Remediation Manager shall provide reasonable notice to the Monitor 
and the Parties before making any such application to the Court, and the Parties and the Monitor shall have an opportunity to be heard on any such application.” 
 
 Defendants’ Position: Defendants consent to the revisions proposed by the Monitor.  Defendants oppose the alternative language proposed by the Monitoring Team in response to Plaintiffs’/SDNY objections. It is not necessary for the Court to alter the Monitor’s 
well settled authority in this matter under prior orders, because there is no basis for a finding that a change is necessary in order to remedy a constitutional violation, or that the Monitor has not properly exercised its authority. The Remediation Manager is not intended 
to replace the Monitoring Team, but rather to step into the shoes of the Commissioner as the chief executive of the DOC within the limited ambit of the Contempt Provisions.  Those shoes include the requirement of Monitor approval, which is a useful check upon any 
ill founded actions by the Remediation Manager, who would necessarily be less familiar with the conditions and history of DOC than the Monitoring Team.  See Defs. Supp. Objs., at 10. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position:  The Court’s Order rightfully requires in § V, E that the Remediation Manager and the Monitor are “independent positions that each report to the Court and are not answerable to each other,” and our proposed deletion here is intended to 
implement that requirement. The Remediation Manager is required by this Order to consult with the Monitor and is expected to work closely with the Monitoring Team. However, because the Remediation Manager is an agent of the court rather than a defendant, it is 
inconsistent to require the Remediation Manager to obtain the Monitor’s approval before taking an action within the scope of the Receiver Manager’s authority. We do not suggest that the Remediation Manager “ignore” provisions of Contempt Orders— those orders 
required recalcitrant defendants to obtain Monitor approval for good reason. But the Remediation Manager is not a defendant. 
 
What would be more appropriate is not requiring Monitor approval but, rather, setting forth a process by which the Remediation Manager and Monitor can come to the Court in the hopefully unlikely event that these two agents of the court disagree. Should the Court 
think it important to include such a process in this order, we suggest: “The Nunez Remediation Manager does not need to obtain the Monitor’s approval for those Contempt Provisions that require Monitor approval. However, the Nunez Remediation Manager shall 
take all reasonable steps to achieve consensus with the Monitor regarding matters that would otherwise require the Monitor’s approval. To the extent necessary, the Remediation Manager or Monitor may raise the matter with the Court, on notice to the parties, and 
provide the basis for why consensus could not be achieved.” 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 30 of 73
30 
New Provision in § V  
Confidentiality. The Remediation Manager Team shall 
hold any information that they obtain from the 
Department or its employees Confidential (as that term is 
defined herein), except to the extent that it is necessary to 
include such information in confidential communications 
with the Monitoring Team, the parties or the Court, or it 
is necessary to include such information in reports of the 
Nunez Remediation Manager filed with the Court.  
“Confidential” for the purpose of this Order means that 
such information shall not be used by the Remediation 
Manager Team for any purpose other than compliance 
with this Order or the Remediation Action Plan, and may 
not be shared by the Remediation Manager Team with 
any person except as necessary to pursue compliance with 
this Order or the Remediation Action Plan.   
 
The Remediation Manager Team may not disclose 
information provided to the Remediation Manager 
Team pursuant to the Nunez Orders, except as 
authorized by this Order, the Court, or by joint 
stipulation of the parties. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants make one proposal, which Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose and the Monitoring Team takes no position.  The Monitoring Team proposes an alternative provision modeled on the Hinds County Order, which the Defendants 
consent to in addition to the language proposed by Defendants.  The Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose the Monitor’s proposal. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team defers to the Court and the Parties with respect to Defendants’ proposal. The Monitoring Team recommends the Court consider whether limitations on disclosure may be appropriate.  We share language 
modeled directly from U.S. v. Hinds Cnty., et al., 3:16-cv-00489 (S.D. Miss.), Dkt. 282-2, § IV , ¶ 3.  As with the inclusion in the Hinds County Order, the Monitoring Team doesn’t believe that such disclosure limitations will inherently inhibit the RM’s work as we 
don’t understand it to be the case in Hinds County either.  We believe this approach is consistent with the Court’s requirements related to public disclosures by the RM to the press.  We think the Court has struck the appropriate balance in this case.  
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs. SECTION IV: Powers of the Remediation Manager on pgs. 6-8; Defs. Supp. Objs. at 7-9. Defendants’ consent to the Monitor’s proposal, as an addition to the more specific limitations proposed by defendants. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We do not agree to the provision proposed by Defendants. First, it is inconsistent with the Remediation Manager’s public-facing duties. Second, the Commissioner and other City agents are not similarly bound, rightfully so to allow 
them to perform necessary functions. And nor do we think this provision is practical or workable. Given the Remediation Manager’s operational role, they will need to communicate on a daily basis with third parties and stakeholders in order to effectively fulfill their 
duties. The definition of “confidential” Defendants propose is far too ambiguous. It will likely chill the Remediation Manager’s ability to communicate effectively, as they will be worried about violating a Court Order when they engage in discussions regarding 
operational issues or seek the advice or input from others. It further is not clear how DOC staff would keep these communications confidential. 
 
With respect to the Monitor’s recommendation, we do not consent to this addition because this provision would effectively bar the Remediation Manager from speaking with not only the public but many non-Party stakeholders about important issues. As we explain 
in our objection to the Order’s proposed bar on public statements by the Remediation Manager, we believe that allowing the Remediation Manager, at their discretion, to give public statements, which could include speaking to the public or having informal meetings with 
relevant stakeholders, serves an important purpose. In order to be successful, the Remediation Manager will need to gain public support for their actions from line staff, the public, and other stakeholders. Silence – particularly in the face of a public discourse that may otherwise be 
dominated by those who are at best unaware of the Remediation Manager's work and at worst in opposition to change – is unlikely to serve the Remediation Manager well as they seek buy-in across the City. Indeed, the inability to publicly explain their rationale for taking certain 
actions may undermine the Remediation Manager’s efforts and credibility. The Commissioner is not bound by a similar requirement to keep all information confidential, and nor could they be, because it could significantly undermine their ability to engage with external 
stakeholders to accomplish initiatives important for the agency. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in § V    
The reports and other communications of the 
Remediation Manager Team submitted to the Court, 
whether in camera, ex parte or on the public docket, 
shall not be admissible as evidence in any proceeding 
except this action. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants proposal is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY .  The Monitoring Team supports the approach.  
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: This provision as it relates to reports filed by the RM is consistent with Consent Judgment § XIX, ¶ 3 and § XX, ¶ 21 (which is also discussed above) and therefore appears reasonable with respect to the reports and other filings by 
the RM. This provision also is made in line with the other provisions in this Order.  The Order contemplates that the RM will engage with the Court on an informal, as needed basis, and can do so ex parte and confidentially.  This provision is consistent with that 
approach as it relates to communications to the Court.  It remains unclear how or why communications between the RM and the Judge (which are already confidential) could be subject to litigation in other, non-related cases.  Most importantly, the fact that such 
communications could be subject to litigation outside of this case will necessarily have a chilling effect on the RM and the Court.  This by extension may also impact the Monitoring Team and its interactions with the RM and the Court.  The Court and the RM should 
be able to communicate freely with one another without concern that such discussions may be subject to litigation outside of this case.  The Monitoring Team cannot conceive of any necessity that advances compliance with the Contempt Provision that would require 
the reports or other communications from the RM to the Court to be subject to litigation outside of this case. In fact, we think the possibility that these communications may be admissible in unrelated cases will only hinder and distract the RM and further delay 
compliance in this case.  Such litigation could be all consuming and a major distraction.  The litigation burden in this case is already significant on its own.  We strongly support the inclusion of this provision as we believe it supports the overall aims of advancing the 
reform effort in Nunez as quickly as possible. 
  
Defendants’ Position: Defendants agree with the Monitor’s proposal. 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 31 of 73
31 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose this new provision proposed by the Monitor. The judge in the action where such evidence is being submitted should decide admissibility pursuant to the applicable rules of evidence. The Remediation Manager serves a very 
different role than the Monitor, and their public statements or communications should not necessarily be treated the same as the Monitor’s. We cannot in this Order anticipate every potential state and federal lawsuit in which a party may seek to introduce a statement, 
document or email by the Remediation Manager, and whether that particular statement, based on those particular claims, is admissible for that particular purpose in that Court. We believe leaving admissibility to judicial discretion, sensitive to the facts in each case, is 
appropriate. 
 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in § V  
To the extent that Plaintiffs’ Counsel obtains information 
from the Remediation Manager Team, the information 
shall be subject to the same restrictions set forth 
regarding such information in § XX., ¶ 11 of the Consent 
Judgment as if the Monitor had provided such 
information to Plaintiffs’ Counsel; shall be subject to the 
Protective Orders entered in this case (e.g. dkts. 89 and 
293); and shall be designated “Confidential” for the 
purposes of those Protective Orders.  Information 
protected by other protective order or confidentiality 
agreements entered into this case (dkts. 290 and 304) and 
shall remain so protected even if disclosed by the 
Remediation Manager to the Plaintiffs’ Counsel. 
 [Provision regarding potential confidentiality of 
information obtained from RM] 
Summary of Issue to the Court: Defendants’ have proposed language in this case.  Plaintiffs note that additional time to confer on this matter is necessary.  The Monitoring Team recommends that the Court permit the Parties and the Monitoring Team to confer and 
advise the Court no later than September 24 on the outcome of those discussions. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Parties have been working to reach resolution on a potential provision regarding the confidentiality and resulting treatment of information that the parties may receive from the Remediation Manager.  Further discussion to either 
reach resolution or to refine the scope of the dispute is needed.  Accordingly, the Monitoring Team recommends that the Court direct the parties to either reach agreement on a proposal or provide competing proposals no later than September 24, 2025.  The 
Monitoring Team strongly recommends that this issue is resolved in the near term versus waiting for a later date.   
 
 
Defendants’ Position: The Remediation Manager will have unprecedented access to confidential agency communications and should not become a conduit for the release of such information without appropriate protections.  Therefore, all information that may be 
provided to the Plaintiffs by the Remediation Manager, which may occur incidentally to their meet and confer obligations, should remain Confidential under the Protective Order in this case.  See Defs. Objs.at 8 and Defs. Supp. Objs. at 8-9. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: While Plaintiffs’ Counsel are amenable to reasonable confidentiality restrictions around certain information received from the Remediation Manager, we oppose Defendants’ proposal because we think it is ambiguous as to what 
Plaintiffs’ confidentiality obligations would be and it appears to be overbroad.  The Orders referenced in Defendants’ proposed language relate to the disclosure of specific categories of information and documents which will likely differ from the type information we 
might receive from the Remediation Manager. For example, Docket Numbers 290 and 304 specifically govern information included in: i) draft Monitor’s reports and ii) DOC’s compliance reports. The proposal also appears to preemptively designate any information 
we ever receive from the Remediation Manager as “Confidential,” regardless of its substance, which is overbroad. 
 
Plaintiffs’ Counsel have no intention of unreasonably disclosing any information and simply want to ensure our confidentiality obligations are unambiguous and reasonable. We are amenable to conferring with Defendants and the Monitor regarding reasonable 
confidentiality restrictions on information received from the Remediation Manager, and agree with the Monitor that conferral regarding this topic can likely be completed by September 24. However, in order to avoid any delay in the Court’s finalization of the order 
appointing the Remediation Manager, we respectfully suggest that these confidentiality requirements can be set forth in a separate order. 
 
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 32 of 73
32 
Section VI: Role of the Monitor 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ VI, A 
 
Role of the Monitor 
Consistent with Section IV(B), this order does not alter 
the role or responsibilities of the Monitor as described in 
the Nunez Orders, including, but not limited to 
obligations to assess compliance, provide technical 
assistance, and regularly report to the Court in 
accordance with his past practices. 
  
Consistent with Section IV(B), thisThis order does 
not alter the role or responsibilities of the Monitor as 
described in the Nunez Orders, including, but not 
limited to obligations to assess compliance, provide 
technical assistance, and to regularly report to the 
Court in accordance with his past practices. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection by the Parties and Monitoring Team to this revision. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: This citation appears to be in error.  We suggest this is just an affirmative statement. 
 
Defendants’ Position: Consent to the changes. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We consent to the changes. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ VI, B 
 
Role of the Monitor 
Beginning with the 20th Reporting Period (January to 
June 2025), the Monitor’s Reports shall include an 
assessment of compliance (pursuant to § XX, ¶ 18 of the 
Consent Judgment) with the select group of provisions 
(as defined by the Action Plan § G, ¶ 5(b)), the 
Contempt Provisions, and the benchmarks of the 
Remediation Action Plan (once approved by the Court).  
The assignment of compliance ratings to all other 
provisions of the Nunez Orders is suspended through 
December 31, 2025. 
  
Beginning with the 20th Reporting Period (January 
to June 2025), the Monitor’s Reports shall include an 
assessment of compliance (pursuant to § XX, ¶ 18 of 
the Consent Judgment) with the select group of 
provisions (as defined by the Action Plan § G, ¶ 
5(b)), the Contempt Provisions, and the benchmarks 
of the Remediation Action Plan (once approved by 
the Court).  The assignment of compliance ratings to 
all other provisions of the Nunez Orders is suspended 
through December 31, 2025. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection by the Parties and Monitoring Team to removal of this provision. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: Given the Court’s July 10, 2025 Order (dkt. 879), the proposed text is deleted because it is no longer necessary. 
 
Defendants’ Position: Consent to this change. 
  
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We consent to this change. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ VI, B 
 
Role of the Monitor 
[Note Originally in § III] The Monitor shall file a report 
within 130 days following each Reporting Period4 
describing the efforts the Department and the 
Remediation Manager have taken to implement the 
requirements of the Remediation Action Plan and 
evaluating the extent to which the Department and 
Remediation Manager have complied with the 
benchmarks of the Remediation Action Plan and each of 
the Contempt Provisions. 
Upon approval of the Remediation Action Plan, following 
the Court’s approval of the Remediation Action Plan, the 
Monitor’s Reports that include assessment of compliance 
pursuant to § XX, ¶ 18 of the Consent Judgment, as 
amended, shall include the Monitor’s assessment as to 
whether the Remediation Action Plan has resulted in: (a) 
substantial and demonstrable progress in achieving 
Substantial Compliance with the Contempt Provisions; 
(b) whether such efforts have resulted in a substantial 
reduction in the risk of harm currently facing incarcerated 
After the Remediation Action Plan has been approved by 
the Court, the bi-annual Monitor’s Report for each 
Reporting Period5 describing the shall also include a 
description of the efforts the Department and the Nunez 
Remediation Manager have taken to implement the 
requirements of the Remediation Action Plan and 
evaluatingan evaluation of the extent to which the 
Department and Remediation Manager Defendants have 
complied with the benchmarks of the Remediation Action 
Plan and each of the Contempt Provisions. Upon a finding 
Upon approval of the Remediation Action Plan, the 
bi-annual Monitor’s Reports for each Reporting 
Period6 shall also: (a) describe the efforts the 
Department and the Remediation Manager Team 
have taken to implement the requirements of the 
Remediation Action Plan, (b) include a compliance 
assessment for each of the Benchmarks in the 
Remediation Action Plan and (c) address the overall 
extent to which the work under the RAP is advancing 
compliance with the Contempt Provisions. 
 
4 The Reporting Periods in this case cover January 1 to June 30 and July 1 to December 31 of each year. 
5 The Reporting Periods in this case cover January 1 to June 30 and July 1 to December 31 of each year. 
6 The Reporting Periods in this case cover January 1 to June 30 and July 1 to December 31 of each year. 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 33 of 73
33 
individuals and DOC; and (c) whether DOC has achieved 
any of the Benchmarks in the Remediation Action Plan. 
by The reports should also describe the Monitoring Team 
that one or more ofextent to which the Defendants have 
met the benchmarks of the Remediation Action Plan or the 
Contempt Provisions isset forth in the Remediation Action 
Plan. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There are three different proposals regarding the content of the Monitor’s Report. Note, Plaintiffs’/SDNY propose that this language is included in the Section III above, but it is included here so the different proposals about the 
content of the Monitor’s Report can be more easily compared. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation:  
 
Monitor’ s Proposal: For clarity, we propose the reporting on the efforts of the RAP should begin after it is approved by the Court.  We recommend we then identify the three additions to the Monitor’s reports that are not otherwise required by the Nunez Court order 
already.  We also propose that an overarching assessment of the RAP is both useful and necessary to the Court and the Parties.  Of course, all hope it will provide the appropriate pathway, but such routine assessments are necessary to see if it is achieving the goal or 
not.  If not, it is critical for all stakeholders to consider what additional steps, if any, may be necessary. 
 
Defendants’ Proposal: We object to the inclusion regarding compliance ratings.  First, this language appears to set a different standard for compliance which we think is confusing and not necessary.  Second, the Monitor’s obligation to assess compliance is addressed 
by other Nunez Court Orders and occurs outside the scope of the RAP.  The Order already explains the Monitor’s reporting remains consistent with past practices.  See § V ¶ A of this Order.  It is both duplicative and confusing to address the fact that the Monitor must 
assess compliance with the contempt provisions because that is already governed by the Consent Judgment and could suggest different standards, when, in fact, they are the same. 
 
Plaintiffs’ Proposal: The Court’s Order currently contemplates that compliance with the Benchmarks must be achieved.  If the Court determines that compliance with the Benchmarks is no longer required, then the Monitoring Team agrees with the formulation by 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY regarding Benchmarks.  The Monitoring Team does recommend that part (c) of its proposal is included with Plaintiffs’/SDNY language should the Court adopt Plaintiffs’/SDNY proposal.  With respect to Plaintiff’s Class/SDNY’s position that the 
Monitor may not address the conduct of the RM, the Monitor does not believe there is any basis for the suggestion that the Monitor should be limited in any way on what it may report regarding the work of the RM, the Nunez Court Orders, and corresponding 
compliance.  Further, for clarity, the fact that the Monitor may report on matters does not create a relationship in which the individual or entity of which the Monitor reports then “answers” to the Monitor.  The Monitor has reported on the Department for over a 
decade, and the Department does not “answer” to the Monitor so the same applies to any reporting the Monitor may do related to the RM and the forthcoming RAP.  The Monitoring Team strongly opposes any proposals or commentary from the parties that suggest 
the Monitor may be limited in what it can report to the Court as it inherently impedes transparency and the very important role the Monitor plays in this case in ensuring that the Parties have a neutral and independent assessment of what is occurring in the jails 
regardless of whether the conduct is directed by the Commissioner or the RM.   
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs. SECTION III: Notice and Opportunity Comment on Reports on pgs. 5-6. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position:  
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY Proposal: While the Remediation Manager will benefit from the Monitor’s input on plans and priorities and feedback on progress, the Monitor’s role is not to evaluate the conduct of the Remediation Manager (who is an agent of the court and, as the 
Court’s proposed Order notes, does not answer to the Monitor), but rather to assess the extent to which Defendants have complied with the orders of this Court. As we explained in our comments to proposals in Section III, Plaintiffs and the Government recognize the 
utility of benchmarks as guideposts for the work under the Remediation Action Plan and as potential indicators of Defendants’ progress towards compliance. However, meeting to-be-determined benchmarks is not the same as achieving substantial compliance with 
the Contempt Provisions. While the Monitor should evaluate and describe the extent to which Defendants have met the benchmarks set forth in the Remediation Action Plan, the Monitor’s compliance assessments should be limited to assessing compliance with the 
Contempt Provisions. Compliance ratings should be reserved for the Contempt Provisions. We do not believe this provision limits what the Monitor may choose to write about in his reports in any way, but rather describes more accurately the role of the Remediation 
Manager (i.e., not a Defendant) and the Benchmarks (i.e., in Plaintiffs’ view, goals for Defendants to meet as they make progress rather than standards to be “complied” with that could lead to termination of the Remediation Manager’s authority).  
 
Monitor’ s Proposal: We do not consent to (b), as we do not think it appropriate to give compliance assessments on benchmarks—only Contempt Provisions. The nature of benchmarks as limited, discrete, intermediate steps do not lend themselves to the sam e 
compliance assessments as do the Contempt Provisions. They should not be rated in the same way. We also oppose the language in (c), because we do not understand the function of the Monitor’s reports to be assessing the RAP, but rather overall progress toward 
Substantial Compliance with the Contempt Provisions. We think our formulation, set forth in proposed revisions to VI(B), is more appropriate.   
 
Defendants’ Proposal: We oppose. We disagree for reasons stated above regarding conflation of Benchmarks and Substantial Compliance with Contempt Provisions, and for the reasons given with regard to our own proposed revisions to this section of the Order. 
Defendants’ proposed new language requires the Monitor’s reports to apply multiple different standards instead of just reporting on whether Defendants have complied with Contempt Provisions. These additional standards and assessments will only lead to confusion. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ VI, B, i 
 
Role of the Monitor 
Within 90 days after the Court’s approval of the 
Remediation Action Plan, the Monitoring Team shall 
develop recommendations regarding streamlining and 
compliance assessment of the Nunez Orders that are not 
subject to the Remediation Action Plan.  The Monitoring 
Team shall provide these recommendations to the parties 
for consideration and comment before submitting the 
recommendations to the Court. 
  
Within 90 days after the Court’s approval of the 
Remediation Action Plan, the Monitoring Team shall 
develop recommendations regarding streamlining 
and assessing compliance assessmentwith the 
provisions of the Nunez Orders that are not subject to 
the Remediation Action Planexcept for the Contempt 
Provisions.  The Monitoring Team shall provide 
these recommendations to the parties for 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 34 of 73
34 
consideration and comment before submitting the 
recommendations to the Court. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection by the Parties and Monitoring Team to the proposed revisions. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: These revisions were made for clarity. 
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants agree to this change. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We consent to this revision. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ VI, D 
 
Role of the Monitor 
The Nunez Remediation Manager and the Monitor are 
independent positions that each report to the Court and 
are not answerable to each other. 
The Nunez Remediation Manager and the Monitor are 
independent positions that each report to the Court and 
are not answerable to each other, except to the extent that 
approval of actions by the Monitor is otherwise required 
consistent with this Order. 
  
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Plaintiffs oppose the addition by Defendants.  The Monitor takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitor defers to the Court and the Parties on this revision, subject to the Monitoring Team’s overall position on approval stated in this document. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs., SECTION VI: Monitor’s Authority on pg. 9. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose for the reasons stated above regarding why the Remediation Manager should not be required to obtain the Monitor’s approval. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§ VI 
 
Role of the Monitor 
 
As part of the parties’ review of the draft Monitor’s 
Report, as provided for by Consent Judgment 
§ XX, ¶¶ 17,18 (as amended at ECF No. 888), the parties 
may request that the Monitor reconsider the proposed 
compliance rating for any Contempt Provision.  Such a 
request must include the basis for the request and any 
relevant facts or documents.  If the Monitor elects not to 
adjust the proposed compliance rating as requested, the 
Monitor shall provide the basis for his decision in the 
final report filed with the Court. 
  
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants proposal is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY.  The Monitoring Team takes no position, but provides a suggestion for a compromise position in the comments below.  
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitor defers to the Court and the Parties on this provision.  However, the Monitor notes the Parties can make such a request during the comment period as permitted under the Consent Judgment, § XX, ¶ 17.  To address the 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY objections, an alternative to the Defendants’ proposal is that the Order could incorporate the first sentence proposed by Defendants, but last sentence (If the Monitor elects) is removed.  This permits the parties to make the request, and the Monitor 
can consider such requests (as it is already required to do under the Consent Judgment), but does not impose an affirmative obligation on the Monitor that could potentially implicate the requirement that no party have authority over the Monitor’s work (see Consent 
Judgment § XX, ¶ 23).  The Monitoring Team has a long demonstrated track record of thoughtfully considering feedback from the parties. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs. SECTION III: Notice and Opportunity Comment on Reports on pgs. 5-6. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. It is unnecessary to add this provision. During the comment period, the parties are free to ask the Monitor to reconsider a proposed compliance rating and it is not necessary to explicitly state this in this Order (this has always 
been the case when the Monitor provided draft reports to the parties before filing). We also do not think it is appropriate to require the Monitor to provide the basis for not accepting every request to change a rating. The Monitor’s reports have always provided 
extensive detail regarding the basis for the compliance rating and adding this new requirement and process now will only create more work for the Monitor and lead to even lengthier reports. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§ VI  A party’s failure to comment on a draft report or a portion 
of a draft report is not waiver of any legal objection or   
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 35 of 73
35 
 
Role of the Monitor 
argument with respect to any action of the Remediation 
Manager or Court ruling. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants proposal is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY.  The Monitoring Team takes no position, 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team defers to the Court and the Parties. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs. SECTION III: Notice and Opportunity Comment on Reports on pgs. 5-6. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. We don’t disagree with the substance of this sentence, but disagree with including it here because we believe it is unnecessary and that this Order need not address Monitor’s reports beyond what the Court has already 
required. 
 
 
 
 
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 36 of 73
36 
Section VII: Immunity and Indemnity 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ VII, A 
 
Immunity and Indemnity 
The Nunez Remediation Manager and the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s staff shall have the status of 
officers and agents of the Court, and as such shall be 
vested with the same immunities as vest with the Court. 
The Nunez Remediation Manager and the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s staffManager Team shall have 
the status of officers and agents of the Court, and as such 
shall be vested with the same immunities as vest with the 
Court.  . 
 
The Nunez Remediation Manager and the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s staff Team shall have the 
status of officers and agents of the Court, and as such 
shall be vested with the same immunities as vest with 
the Court. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: The revisions to conform the language to apply to the Remediation Manager Team are on consent/no objection.  Defendants propose removal of the text starting with “and as such” is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY and the 
Monitoring Team takes no position.  
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: This revision is made for consistency about the applicability of the provision to the Remediation Manager Team.  The Monitoring Team does not take a position with respect to the issue of the applicability of immunities. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Obs., SECTION VII: Representation and Indemnification of the Remediation Manager on pgs. 9-13. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose Defendants’ proposal. It’s critical that the Remediation Manager, as an agent of the court, be granted appropriate immunity so as to secure qualified candidates and ensure the Remediation Manager can effectively discharge 
their duties. We also note that the issue of immunity was already briefed to the Court and the Court rightfully decided immunity was appropriate. We consent to the revisions proposed by the Monitor. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ VII, B 
 
Immunity and Indemnity 
The Defendants shall indemnify the Nunez Remediation 
Manager and their staff in any litigation brought against 
the Nunez Remediation Manager or their staff regarding 
activities conducted in the course of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s official duties. 
The Defendants shall indemnify the Nunez Remediation 
Manager and their staff in any litigation brought against 
the Nunez Remediation Manager or their staff regarding 
activities conducted in the course of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s official duties. 
 
The Defendants shall indemnify the Nunezany 
Remediation Manager and their staffTeam member 
in any litigation brought against the Nuneza 
Remediation Manager or their staffTeam member 
regarding activities conducted in the course of the 
Nunez Remediation Manager’s their official duties. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: The revisions to conform the language for the provision to apply to the Remediation Manager Team are on consent/no objection (if the Court elects to maintain the provision).  Defendants propose the provision is deleted and the 
deletion of the paragraph is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY.  The Monitoring Team takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: This revision is made for consistency about the applicability of the provision to the Remediation Manager Team.  The Monitoring Team does not take a position with respect to the issue of the applicability of immunities. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Obs., SECTION VII: Representation and Indemnification of the Remediation Manager on pgs. 9-13. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose Defendants’ proposal to delete this provision. This provision is necessary to ensure that the Remediation Manager is protected from the risk of personal liability. We note that the issue of indemnification was already briefed to 
the Court and the Court rightfully decided that Defendants should indemnify the Remediation Manager.  Again, removing this indemnification provision would make it quite difficult to secure qualified candidates for this Remediation Manager position.   
 
 
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 37 of 73
37 
Section VIII: Compensation and Responsibility for Payment 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ VIII, A 
 
Compensation and 
Responsibility for 
Payment 
The City of New York shall bear all reasonable fees, 
costs, and expenses of the Nunez Remediation Manager, 
including payments to the Nunez Remediation 
Manager’s staff.  Such fees, costs, and expenses shall be 
sufficient to allow the Nunez Remediation Manager to 
fulfill their duties pursuant to this Order in a reasonable 
and efficient manner.  The Nunez Remediation Manager 
may hire or consult with such additional qualified staff 
as is reasonably necessary to fulfill their duties pursuant 
to this Order without duplication of effort.  The Nunez 
Remediation Manager shall submit an invoice for their 
services, and the services of their consultants and staff, 
to the City on a monthly basis.  Those invoices will 
include charges for fees, costs, and expenses.  Payment 
on such invoices shall be made within 60 days of receipt.  
If the City objects to any fees, costs, or expenses as 
unreasonable, unnecessary, or duplicative, the City shall 
submit the invoice to the Court for a determination of 
reasonable fees, costs, and expenses. 
The City of New York shall bear all reasonable fees, 
costs, and expenses of the Nunez Remediation Manager, 
including payments to the Nunez Remediation Manager’s 
staff.Remediation Manager Team, consistent with the 
Schedule of Expected Fees and Expenses previously 
approved by the Court, set forth in Appendix A.  Such 
fees, costs, and expenses shall be sufficient to allow the 
Nunez Remediation Manager to fulfill their duties 
pursuant to this Order in a reasonable and efficient 
manner.  The Nunez Remediation Manager may hire or 
consult with such additional qualified staff as is 
reasonably necessary to fulfill their duties pursuant to this 
Order without duplication of effort. after notice and 
opportunity to the parties and approval of the Court.  The 
Nunez Remediation Manager shall submit an invoice for 
their services, and the services of their consultants and 
staff, consistent with Appendix A, to the City on a 
monthly basis.  Those invoices will include charges for 
fees, costs, and expenses.  Payment on suchapproved 
invoices shall be made within 60 days of receipt.  If the 
City objects to any fees, costs, or expenses as contrary to 
the Court’s prior orders or other law, unreasonable, 
unnecessary, or duplicative, the City shall submit the 
invoice to the Court for a determination of reasonable 
fees, costs, and expenses. 
The City of New York shall bear all reasonable fees, costs, 
and expenses of the Nunez Remediation Manager, 
including payments to the Nunez Remediation Manager’s 
staffManager Team.  Such fees, costs, and expenses shall 
be sufficient to allow the Nunez Remediation Manager to 
fulfill their duties pursuant to this Order in a reasonable 
and efficient manner.  The Nunez Remediation Manager 
may hire or consult with such additional qualified staff as 
is reasonably necessary to fulfill their duties pursuant to 
this Order without duplication of effort.  The Nunez 
Remediation Manager shall submit an invoice for their 
services, and the services of their consultants and staff, to 
the City on a monthly basis.  Those invoices will include 
charges for fees, costs, and expenses.  Payment on such 
invoices shall be made within 60 days of receipt.  If the 
City objects to any fees, costs, or expenses as 
unreasonable, unnecessary, or duplicative, the City shall 
submit the invoice to the Court for a determination of 
reasonable fees, costs, and expenses. 
The City of New York shall bear all reasonable fees, 
costs, and expenses of the Nunez Remediation 
Manager, including payments to the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s staffManager Team.  Such 
fees, costs, and expenses shall be sufficient to allow 
the Nunez Remediation Manager to fulfill their 
duties pursuant to this Order in a reasonable and 
efficient manner.  The Nunez Remediation Manager 
may hire or consult with such additional qualified 
staff as is reasonably necessary to fulfill their duties 
pursuant to this Order without duplication of effort. 
i. The Nunez Remediation Manager shall 
submit an invoice for their services, and 
the services of their consultants and 
staff, to the City on a monthly basis.  
Those invoices will include charges for 
fees, costs, and expenses.  Payment on 
such invoices shall be made within 60 
days of receipt. 
i.ii. If the City objects to any fees, costs, or 
expenses as unreasonable, unnecessary, 
or duplicative, the City shall submit the 
invoice to the Court for a determination 
of reasonable fees, costs, and expenses. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There are three different proposals.  Defendants propose one set of revisions, opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY.  The Monitoring Team takes no position with respect to the proposals by Defendants except that the Monitoring Team 
opposes the timing that contemplate approval of fees in advance of appointment of the RM.  The Monitoring Team proposes a different set of revisions, which Defendants will consent to if the Court does not adopt Defendants’ proposal.  Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose the 
Monitor’s revisions.  The Plaintiffs’/SDNY propose no changes are necessary except to conform the language to the definition of Remediation Manager team.  The Plaintiffs’/SDNY take no position with respect to the formatting proposal by the Monitoring Team.  
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team recommends these minor recommendations and divisions of provision so that it is easy to follow and review. The Monitor recommends the removal of the deleted language because it is addressed in § IV, B, vi 
and is not entirely consistent with that provision.  The order should only address the concept once and should also address the Court’s May 13, 2025 Order, particularly the Court’s five enumerated Receivership Goals identified on page 19 of that Order.  To the extent 
that § IV, B, vi does not capture all individuals that the RM may hire, the Monitoring Team has resolved that issue with its proposed revisions that captures all potential hires.  We believe it is confusing and creates ambiguity to have two different provisions that are 
similar, but slightly different, regarding the composition of the RM Team. As noted in the revisions to § IV, B, vi appropriate guidelines regarding the composition of the RM Team are critical to achieving the Court’s stated goals for this process.   
 
We recognize the Defendants included additional revisions to these paragraphs and we defer to Court and the parties on inclusion of those additional items.  For reasons noted elsewhere, the Monitoring Team opposes the approach in which fess are approved in 
advance of appointment of the RM (see the next provision). 
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants’ do not oppose the recommendations by the Monitoring Team, but believe Defendants’ construction of the order is necessary, especially the requirement that a statement of expected reasonable costs and expenses be approved in 
advance of the final appointment of the Remediation Manger. See Defs. Objs., SECTION VIII: Remediation Manager Compensation and Expenses on pg. 13; Defs. Supp. Objs.,at 11. Note that the language of the defendants’ proposal has been changed to include 
legal fees within compensable expenses. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position:   
We understand that the only substantive change the Monitor has proposed here is the deletion of the following sentence: “The Nunez Remediation Manager may hire or consult with such additional qualified staff as is reasonably necessary to fulfill their duties 
pursuant to this Order without duplication of effort.” We oppose the deletion of this sentence because we do not agree it is entirely redundant with Section IV .B.vi. As we read it, Section IV .B.vi is limited in its discussion to consultants or technical assistants, whereas 
this provision explicitly authorizes the Remediation Manager to hire staff members for his Team, such as a subject matter expert, if necessary. It is not clear that such a hire is contemplated by Section IV .B.vi. Plaintiffs’/SDNY have no position on the question of 
formatting of this section. 
 
With respect to Defendants’  proposal: We oppose. The City is the appropriate entity to bear the Remediation Manager’s legal fees and expenses, because this remedy is only necessary because of the City’s contempt. We also reiterate our objection (see our response 
Defendants' proposed edits to § IV , B, vi) to requiring the Remediation Manager to provide notice to the parties and seek Court approval before retaining staff to assist in fulfilling their duties. We also disagree, as noted below, with referrals to Appendix A because we 
do not agree that there should be a separate order regarding fees and expenses before the RM is appointed. 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 38 of 73
38 
 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ VIII, B 
 
Compensation and 
Responsibility for 
Payment 
Within 30 days of the date of Acceptance Effective Date, 
the Nunez Remediation Manager shall submit to the 
Court and the City an initial statement of rates and 
proposed fees and expenses, which the Nunez 
Remediation Manager may modify from time to time as 
appropriate.  If the City raises any objection to the 
statement, the City and the Nunez Remediation Manager 
shall promptly meet and confer, and any unresolved 
objections shall jointly be submitted to the Court for 
resolution. 
Within 30 days of the date of Acceptance Effective Date, 
the Nunez Remediation Manager shall submit to the 
Court and the City an initial statement of rates and 
proposed fees and expenses, which the Nunez 
Remediation Manager may modify from time to time as 
appropriate.  If the City raises any objection to the 
statement, the City and the Nunez Remediation Manager 
shall promptly meet and confer, and any unresolved 
objections shall jointly be submitted to the Court for 
resolution. 
 
B. Within 30 days of the date of Acceptance 
Effective Date, theThe Nunez Remediation Manager 
shall submit to the Court and the City an initial 
statement of rates and proposed fees and expenses, 
whicha proposed Schedule of Fees and Expenses for 
the Remediation Manager Team within 30 days of 
appointment.  This Schedule shall include an 
estimate of the title and duties of each member of the 
Remediation Manager Team that the Nunez 
Remediation Manager may modify from time to time 
as appropriate.  If the City raises any objection to the 
statement, the City and believes will be required to 
exercise the duties of the Nunez Remediation 
Manager shall promptly meetpursuant to the Court 
order and a statement of the proposed fees and 
expenses. 
i. The Nunez Remediation Manager and 
the City shall confer, in good faith 
regarding the proposal for fees and 
any unresolved objections shall 
jointly be submittedexpenses and to 
the extent that the City and Nunez 
Remediation Manager agree they 
shall make a joint proposal for 
approval of the statement of fees and 
expenses. 
ii. To the extent that the City and the 
Nunez Remediation Manager disagree 
regarding the Schedule of Fees and 
Expenses, they shall make separate 
submissions to the Court for 
resolutionstating the basis for the 
disagreement. 
iii. The Court shall approve or modify 
the proposed Schedule of Fees and 
Expenses. [Defendants Proposal for 
additional language in this 
paragraph: In approving proposed 
fees the Court will consider whether 
the compensation to be paid to the 
Nunez Remediation Manager and 
each of  their staff is commensurate 
with the salary earned by employees 
of the City of New York serving in 
comparable roles and providing 
comparable services.] 
i.iv. The Nunez Remediation Manager 
may modify rates and proposed fees 
and expenses from time to time as 
appropriate upon approval of the 
Court.  The Nunez Remediation 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 39 of 73
39 
Manager shall confer with the City in 
advance of any future applications to 
the Court regarding fees in an attempt 
to reach agreement.  If agreement 
cannot be reached, the Nunez 
Remediation Manager and the City 
shall make separate submissions to 
the Court stating the basis for the 
disagreement. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There are three different positions.  Defendants propose elimination of this provision given its other proposals.  Plaintiffs’/SDNY and the Monitoring Team oppose the elimination.  The Monitoring Team proposes certain 
revisions, which Defendants will consent to if the Court does not adopt Defendants’ proposal and the Court also includes the text proposed in brackets and yellow highlights.  The Monitor takes no position on the language proposed by Defendants in yellow highlight.  
Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose the Monitor’s revisions.  The Plaintiffs’/SDNY propose no changes are necessary. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team believes any selection of the RM necessarily requires an understanding of cost estimates before the selection of the RM, which is why the Monitoring Team recommended the process for selection of the RM 
include consideration of fees and expenses. With respect to a submission to the Court regarding fees, we recommend that any submission is discussed with the City before it is provided to the Court.  The timing proposed by the Monitoring Team is intended to mirror 
the timing considered by the Court.  As noted in other sections of this Order, the Monitoring Team has recommended the Court discuss the appropriate start date with the RM and so the definition of what that may be may change.  We recommend that any submission 
to the City conforms with the timing of when the RM is set to start, which is why “appointment” is bracketed and highlighted in yellow so it may be updated as the Court determines the timing after consultation with the selected RM.  Overall, the changes made here 
support the need for the RM to engage the City first and directly and for judicial economy such that any submissions to the Court regarding fees will either be on consent or specifically identify the matters or disputes that require Court determination.  The language in 
brackets and yellow highlight was proposed by Defendants, and the Monitoring Team takes no position, but includes it for the Court’s consideration. 
 
Defendants’ Position: City maintains its request that this process occur before the final appointment of the RM, but if the Court will not order that sequence the City joins in the Monitor’s proposal in the alternative (including the language in highlight which the 
Monitor reports it takes no position on). See Defs. Objs., SECTION VIII: Remediation Manager Compensation and Expenses on pg. 13; Def. Supp. Objs. at 11. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We believe the Court’s original language is appropriate, and oppose the revisions proposed by Defendants and the Monitor.  It is not feasible for the Remediation Manager to estimate all expenses before beginning work and making an 
initial assessment of resources needed (i.e. particular technical or subject matter experts, etc.). The Remediation Manager should, at the 30-day point the Court proposes, have a more robust sense of what fees and expenses the role requires. We expect that the parties, 
the Monitor, and the Court will have discussions with Remediation Manager candidates regarding estimated fees and costs as part of the selection process. However, we do not think it is reasonable to ask the individual to provide a detailed description of their budget 
prior to their appointment. The original language in the Court’s order still allows the City an opportunity to object to the Remediation Manager’s proposed rates, costs, and expenses.  Nor do we believe the proposal that fees be “comparable to” City salaries is 
appropriate, as few such comparisons are available, and the protections of a City civil service job and its pension and other benefits render comparisons difficult at best. The Monitor does not provide any examples of what he would consider to be a comparable 
“position.”  In addition, this ambiguous salary cap may impede the Remediation Manager from adding the most qualified individuals to their limited team. We also do not understand such terms to have been applied to the Monitor’s compensation or the compensation 
of his staff, and do not think it would be appropriate here.  The Monitor’s proposal introduces an entire month of potential delay during a conferral process that will inevitably still wind up in Court. Plaintiffs will also need an opportunity to be heard on any dispute to 
ensure that the Plaintiff Class’ interests in relief are protected. We believe that the Court is well positioned to manage this process under the terms of its initial order. 
 
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 40 of 73
40 
Section IX: Duration of the Nunez Remediation Manager’s Tenure 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IX, A 
 
Duration of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s 
Tenure 
The Nunez Remediation Manager’s authority will 
continue until the Court determines that Substantial 
Compliance (defined in Section XX, ¶ 18 of the Consent 
Judgment) with all of the Contempt Provisions has been 
achieved and sustained for a period of 12 months 
consistent with Section III. 
The Nunez Remediation Manager’s authority will 
continue, subject to reductions in that authority pursuant 
to Section III above, until the Court determines that 
Substantial Compliance (defined in Section XX, ¶ 18 of 
the Consent Judgment)Nunez Remediation Manager’s 
authority is removed pursuant to Section II above with 
respect to all of the Contempt Provisions has been 
achieved and sustained for a period of 12 months 
consistent with Section III, at which time this Order will 
terminate.   
The Nunez Remediation Manager’s authorityManager will 
continueremain in place until the Court determines that 
Substantial Compliance (defined in Section XX, ¶ 18 of the 
Consent Judgment) with all of the Contempt Provisions has 
been achieved and sustained for a period of 12three 
successive Reporting Periods (i.e., 18 months consistent 
with Section III.).   
 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There are two different proposals.  One is proposed by Defendants and consented by the Monitoring Team and opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY.  The Plaintiffs’/SDNY proposal is opposed by Defendants. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team believes the original language as drafted conflicts with § III of this Order and pages 44 to 45 of the Court’s May 13, 2025 Order.  The Court explained it will assess and terminate authority of the RM upon 
individual assessments of compliance with Benchmarks and Contempt Provisions.  However, the language as originally drafted suggests that the authority of the RM will not be terminated until Substantial Compliance with all the Contempt Provisions has been 
achieved. We believe the proposal by Defendants resolves those issues.   
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs., SECTION III: Notice and Opportunity Comment on Reports on pgs. 5-6. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position:  
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY Proposal: The edit in the last sentence is proposed for clarity. It is our understanding that the Court intended the Remediation Manager’s authority to terminate only once the Court has determined that Substantial Compliance has been achieved for 
three consecutive reporting periods, which we believe is necessary and prudent given the history of this case. To respond to the Monitoring Team's concern about drafting, we propose amending  this provision to read "The Nunez Remediation Manager will remain in 
place until the Court determines that..." to make it consistent with the other provisions in the order that allow elements of the Remediation Manager's authority to terminate on findings of sustained Substantial Compliance in areas relating to those particular Contempt 
Provisions. See Section III. We think that edit makes clear that the Remediation Manager will remain until all Contempt Provisions have been brought into sustained Substantial Compliance, which we think was the Court's intent and which we strongly support as 
necessary.  
 
Defendants’ Proposal: We strongly oppose these revisions. First, we think this provision is intended to cover the Remediation Manager’s authority globally—and in our view, these revisions could be read as terminating the Remediation Manager’s authority globally 
after one Contempt Provision has been found to be in Substantial Compliance (an unintended reading, as we understand, and one inconsistent with the requirements of Section III). Second, we strongly oppose tying termination of authority to completion of 
benchmarks, which we explain further in our comments above.  Finally, we think it is very confusing to define how long the Remediation Manager will be in place (a very important term of this Order) through references to another Section of the Order. This provision 
must be totally clear, and our proposed language is. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ IX, B 
 
Duration of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s 
Tenure 
Nothing in this Order affects the terms of the Consent 
Judgment or other Nunez Orders, which remain in full 
force and effect.  In the event the Nunez Remediation 
Manager’s tenure terminates, the Consent Judgment and 
other Nunez Orders will remain in full force and effect 
until the Court makes a finding that the Defendants have 
achieved Substantial Compliance with the provisions of 
the Consent Judgment and have maintained Substantial 
Compliance for a period of twenty-four (24) months, as 
set forth in Section XXI, ¶ 5 of the Consent Judgment. 
   
No proposed revisions or objections. 
 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 41 of 73
41 
New Provision in 
§ IX 
 
Duration of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s 
Tenure 
 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section IX-A, the 
employment of the Nunez Remediation Manager shall 
terminate four years after the date of this Order, and upon 
notice and opportunity to be heard by the parties the Court 
may extend the employment of the Nunez Remediation 
Manager, appoint a new Nunez Remediation Manager, or 
terminate or modify this Order. 
  
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendant’s proposal is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY. The Monitoring Team proposes an alternative consideration should the Court determine a more routine interval of RM’s duties should be evaluated.  
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team appreciates the goal of this proposal to ensure there is accountability for the RM to conduct work as timely and efficiently as possible and to incentivize progress so the RM is not engaged longer than needed. 
As noted in the Monitoring Team’s comments to Section III, the Monitor recommends that there may be a useful model in Hinds County Order. In that Order it notes that, “Each year, the Receiver shall schedule a formal assessment with the Court, during which the 
Court will regularly assess progress under the Receivership and determine whether the Receiver’s duties should be modified or eliminated.” A similar type of assessment by the Court may be appropriate here following the filing of the Monitor’s Reports (note, in 
Hinds County there will be no Monitor Reports during the receivership). See, U.S. v. Hinds Cnty., et al., 3:16-cv-00489 (S.D. Miss.), Dkt. 282-2, § V. The Monitor does not take a position on the Defendants’ proposal. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs., SECTION X: Term of Remediation Manager/Objections to Requests on pgs. 13-14. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. The Court has set a clear standard for termination of the Remediation Manager’s authority, and it is necessarily tied to compliance, not an arbitrary time limit—which only encourages those opposed to reform to “wait out” 
the Remediation Manager. The Court has ordered the appointment of a Remediation Manager as a remedy for contempt, and as such it should only terminate when compliance has been achieved. We oppose the Monitor’s suggestion that this order prescribe formal 
assessments of the Remediation Manager’s process, with a potential modification or elimination of duties that may require briefing and/or a hearing, every six months after each Monitor report is filed. As we noted in our comments to the “new paragraph” proposed 
by Defendants to follow § III, ¶ C, we think it unnecessary and burdensome to create a formal, intermittent judicial review process. The Court may, of course, intervene at any point based on the copious amount of information the Court will receive from the 
Remediation Manager and the Monitor. 
 
 
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 42 of 73
42 
Section X: Cooperation 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ X, A 
 
Cooperation 
The Defendants, and all agents or persons within the 
employ of the Defendants (including contract 
employees), and all persons in concert and in 
participation with them, the Monitor, and all counsel in 
this action, shall fully cooperate with the Nunez 
Remediation Manager in the discharge of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s duties under this Order, and 
shall promptly respond to all inquiries and requests 
related to compliance with the Nunez Orders. 
The Defendantsparties, and all agents or persons within 
the employ of the Defendants (including contract 
employees), and all persons in concert and in 
participation with themthe parties and, the Monitor, and 
all counsel in this action,  shall fully cooperate with the 
Nunez Remediation Manager Team in the discharge of 
the Nunez Remediation Manager’s duties under this 
Order. The parties, and shall promptly respond to all 
inquiries and requests related to compliance with the 
Nunez Orders in a reasonable period of time. To the 
extent that a party asserts that information requested by 
the Remediation Manager Team is privileged, or is 
unrelated to the proper duties of the Nunez Remediation 
Manager, they may assert such objections to the Nunez 
Remediation Manager.  To the extent necessary to resolve 
such objections, the Nunez Remediation Manager may 
seek appropriate relief from the Court. 
 
The Defendants, and all agents or persons within the 
employ of the Defendants (including contract 
employees), and all persons in concert and in 
participation with them, the Monitor, and all counsel 
in this action, shall fully cooperate with the Nunez 
Remediation Manager in the discharge of the Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s duties under this Order. , 
and Defendants shall promptly respond to all 
inquiries and requests from the Remediation 
Manager Team related to compliance with the Nunez 
Orders. To the extent that a party asserts that 
information requested by the Remediation Manager 
Team is privileged, or is unrelated to the proper 
duties of the Nunez Remediation Manager, they may 
assert such objections to the Nunez Remediation 
Manager.  To the extent necessary to resolve such 
objections, the Nunez Remediation Manager may 
seek appropriate relief from the Court. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection to the change to split the first sentence into two sentences with a period after “duties under this Order”.  There is also consent/no objection to the last two sentences of this paragraph.  However, there 
are two different proposals about who this provision applies to.  Defendants propose this provision apply to all parties, that the provision does not apply to the parties’ counsel, and that the provision for information requests by the RM apply to all parties versus just 
Defendants.  Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose the changes by Defendants’ and the Monitoring Team takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team has proposed two revisions.  The first revision is made for clarity by creating two separate sentences.  Two separate sentences are needed because these are two different obligations and so we believe that the 
text should be separated.  The final sentence (starting with “To the extent”…) was added at the recommendation of Defendants and we understand that P laintiffs’/SDNY do not object to the addition. We note that Defendants have made further revisions to this 
language, and we defer to the Court and the Parties as to whether the additional objections to requests from the RM be included. 
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants propose different languages for the first sentence.  Defendants consent to the last two sentences included in the Monitor’s proposal (which also appear in the Defendants’ proposal). Defendants object to counsel being required to 
cooperate with the Remediation Manager because counsel have an overarching obligation of loyalty to their clients and they do not represent the Remediation Manager.  Therefore, it would present a conflict of interest to require counsel for the parties to cooperate 
with the Remediation Manager. Nevertheless, counsel for defendants fully intend to be of assistance to the Remediation Manager as much as is reasonably possible, and so long as that assistance does not conflict with their obligations to DOC and the City.  See Defs. 
Supp. Objs. at 11-12. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We would consent to the Monitor’s revisions.  With respect to Defendants’ proposal, we oppose these edits to the Court’s language. Defendants are under an obligation to cooperate with the Remediation Manager as part of the 
Remediation Manager’s exercise of authority within Defendants’ agency, and are therefore differently situated than Plaintiffs and the Government. This section should remain focused on Defendants.  
 
We do not believe Defendants’ proposal to remove references to counsel in this paragraph is necessary. Any conflict of interest that may hypothetically arise (in our view, an unlikely scenario) can be dealt with based on the specifics of that theoretical conflict.  
 
Regarding the sentences that begin “To the extent,” we agree. 
 
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 43 of 73
43 
Section XI: Other Terms 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ XI, C 
 
Other Terms 
The Nunez Remediation Manager and their staff shall 
have the authority to communicate ex parte and 
confidentially with each party and each party’s legal 
representatives, as well as with the Court and the 
Monitoring Team. 
  
The Nunez Remediation Manager and their staff 
Team shall have the authority to communicate ex 
parte and confidentially with each party and each 
party’s legal representatives, as well as with the 
Court and the Monitoring Team. Plaintiffs’ Counsel 
access to information and other materials remains 
governed by Consent Judgment § XX, ¶ 10. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Consent/no objection to the change to Remediation Manager Team.  Defendants consent to the additional language proposal at the end of the paragraph by the Monitoring Team, but it is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY.  The 
Monitoring Team provides considerations for the Court should it determine that a different process for Plaintiffs/SDNY access to information is necessary upon the appointment of the RM. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: We recommend this additional language is added at the end of the paragraph to ensure applicability to the RM Team.  The sentence added at the end reinforces that access to information remains unchanged.  To the extent that 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY believe that their access to information should be altered in light of the appointment of the RM, then a process for sharing of that information must be devised and developed.  As noted elsewhere in our comments, assuming that explicit provisions of 
the Nunez Court Order simply don’t apply because of the appointment of the RM is not workable.  While the Monitoring Team believes the access to information clause from the Consent Judgment remains most appropriate in this case, if the Court determines that 
Plaintiffs/SDNY may now have access to information via a different avenue than what is prescribed under Consent Judgment § XX, ¶ 10, then a specific process for the provision of information is needed.  In particular such process must include, (a) to the extent that 
the RM may provide information to the parties that the Monitor does not have, then the Monitor must necessarily be provided that information; (b) privileged information shall not be shared with Plaintiffs’ Counsel absent Defendants’ consent and (c) the provision of 
information shall not interfere with the Monitor’s ability to effectively monitor this Agreement.  These three requirements are necessary, and we don’t see the appointment of the RM creating a basis for the Parties having access to information that does not meet these 
three requirements.   
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants consent to the Monitor’s proposed revision by the Monitor with the following clarifying changes to the last sentence.  Plaintiffs’ Counsel access to information and other materials remains governed by Consent Judgment § XX, ¶ 10, 
and those provisions shall apply to information that may be provided to the plaintiffs by the Remediation Manager to the same degree as it applies to information provided by the Monitor.  This provisions is not intended to grant the Remediation Manger any 
obligation to provide the plaintiffs with information.  See Defs. Supp. Objs. at 9 n. 8. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose the proposed last sentence because we feel this reference to this particular provision of the Consent Judgment introduces ambiguity—it could be read to imply that we cannot get information directly from the Remediation 
Manager, but would have to go through the Monitor.   
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ XI, A 
 
Other Terms 
If at any point the Nunez Remediation Manager 
determines that they need additional funding to fulfill the 
Remediation Action Plan that is not budgeted for that 
fiscal year, the Nunez Remediation Manager shall 
immediately consult the Commissioner before notifying 
the City Council’s Finance Division and the Mayor’s 
Office of Management and Budget of the specific 
purpose and the amount of funds needed.  If the issue is 
not timely resolved, the Nunez Remediation Manager or 
any party may request a hearing before the Court. 
  
If at any point the Nunez Remediation Manager 
determines that they needthe Department needs 
additional funding to fulfill the Remediation Action 
Plan that is not budgeted for that fiscal year, the 
Nunez Remediation Manager shall immediately 
consult the Commissioner before notifying the City 
Council’s Finance Division and the Mayor’s Office 
of Management and Budget of the specific purpose 
and the amount of funds needed.  If the issue is not 
timely resolved, the Nunez Remediation Manager or 
any party may request a hearing before the Court. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection by the Parties and Monitoring Team to these revisions. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: Revisions made for clarity. 
 
Defendants’ Position: We consent. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We consent. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 44 of 73
44 
§ XI, D 
 
Other Terms 
Absent leave of the Court, the Nunez Remediation 
Manager and their staff may not testify in any litigation 
or proceeding other than this case, including public 
hearings or other proceedings before the New York City 
Council, the Board of Correction, or the New York State 
legislature, with regard to any act or omission of the 
DOC or any of the DOC’s agents, representatives, or 
employees related to the Nunez Orders.  The Nunez 
Remediation Manager and their staff may not give 
interviews or make public statements regarding their 
work under the Nunez Orders, other than reports filed on 
the docket, without the permission of the Court. 
 
Absent leave of the Court, the Nunez Remediation 
Manager Team and their staff may not testify in any 
litigation or proceeding other than this case, including 
public hearings or other proceedings before the New York 
City Council, the Board of Correction, or the New York 
State legislature, with regard to any act or omission of the 
DOC or any of the DOC’s agents, representatives, or 
employees related to the Nunez Orders.  The Nunez 
Remediation Manager and their staff may not give 
interviews or make public statements regarding their work 
under the Nunez Orders, other than reports filed on the 
docket, without the permission of the Court. 
Absent leave of the Court, the Nunez Remediation 
Manager and their staffTeam may not testify in any 
litigation or proceeding other than this case, 
including public hearings or other proceedings before 
the New York City Council, the Board of Correction, 
or the New York State legislature, with regard to any 
act or omission of the DOC or any of the DOC’s 
agents, representatives, or employees related to the 
Nunez Orders.  The Nunez Remediation Manager 
and their staffTeam may not give interviews or make 
public statements regarding their work under the 
Nunez Orders, other than reports filed on the docket, 
without the permission of the Court. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection to the alterations that this provision applies to the Remediation Manager Team (including consultants) and not just the Remediation Manager and their staff.  The Plaintiffs’/SDNY propose deletion of 
the last clause which the Defendants and Monitoring Team oppose. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team has proposed a slight revision to ensure the entire Remediation Manager’s Team (staff and consultants) is included.  With respect to Plaintiffs’/SDNY proposed revision, the Order does not preclude the RM 
from making public statements but simply requires the Court’s permission before the RM (or the RM’s staff) may speak with the press.  The Court’s guidance is invaluable, and the Monitoring Team believes that the language as drafted by the Court supports an 
efficient and appropriate administration of the RM’s work and therefore should remain as drafted.  We note that the Hinds County Order doesn’t even permit the Receiver to speak with the press.  This provision provides necessary latitude with appropriate need for 
consultation and guidance with the Court. 
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants’ consent to the changes proposed by the Monitor.  Defendants object to the proposed change and agree with the Monitor’s comments. The RM is an agent of the Court and it is inappropriate for a judicial agent to engage in 
unrestricted public statements for the same reasons that it would be inappropriate for the Judge to do so. See Ligon v. City of N.Y., 538 F. App'x 101, 102-03 (2d Cir. 2013), explained and superseded by, Ligon v. City of N.Y . (In re Reassignment of Cases), 736 F.3d 
118, 127 (2d Cir. 2013) (recusing District Judge in part because of statements to the media suggesting bias).  Def. maintain this objection. The Hinds County final order contains a similar provision prohibiting public statements by the RM, absent Court approval. The 
Hinds order states: “The Receiver and their personnel may not make any public statements (at a press conference or otherwise) with regard to any act or omission of the County, or disclose information provided to the Receiver pursuant to this Receivership, except as 
authorized by this Order, the Court, or by joint stipulation of the parties.” The Proposed Order should adopt this language. See Defs. Supp. Objs. at 8-9. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We agree that it is important to protect the Remediation Manger from being compelled to testify and so do not object to the first sentence of this paragraph. However, allowing the Remediation Manager, at their discretion, to give 
“public” statements-—which  could include speaking to the press or something as minor as having informal meetings with relevant stakeholders like the unions—serves an important purpose. In order to be successful, the Remediation Manager will need to gain  public 
support for their actions from line staff, the public, and other stakeholders. Silence—particularly in the face of a public discourse that may otherwise be dominated by those who are at best unaware of the Remedi ation Manager's work and at worst in opposition to 
change—is unlikely to serve the Remediation Manager well as they seek buy -in across the City. Indeed, the inability to publicly explain their rationale for taking certain actions may undermine the Remediation Manager’s efforts and credibility. 
 
Moreover, while the Remediation Manager is a judicial agent, they are not positioned the same as a judge, so Ligon is inapposite. For example, the Remediation Manager will not be responding to adversarial submissions but will instead be engaging in frequent, 
generally "ex parte" conversations. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ XI, E 
 
Other Terms 
Unless such conflict is waived in writing by the Parties, 
the Nunez Remediation Manager and their staff may not 
accept employment or provide consulting services that 
present a conflict of interest with their responsibilities 
under this Order, including being retained (on a paid or 
unpaid basis) by any current or future litigant or 
claimant, or such litigant’s or claimant’s attorney, in 
connection with a claim or suit against the DOC or the 
DOC’s agents, representatives, or employees. 
  
Unless such conflict is waived in writing by the 
Parties,parties, no member of the Nunez Remediation 
Manager and their staffTeam may not accept 
employment or provide consulting services that 
present a conflict of interest with their 
responsibilities under this Order, including being 
retained (on a paid or unpaid basis) by any current or 
future litigant or claimant, or such litigant’s or 
claimant’s attorney, in connection with a claim or 
suit against the DOC or the DOC’s agents, 
representatives, or employees. 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: There is consent/no objection by the Parties and Monitoring Team to the proposed revisions. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: This additional language is added for clarity and to ensure it applies to all members of the RM’s team. 
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants agree. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We do not object to this revision. 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 45 of 73
45 
 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ XI, F 
 
Other Terms 
The Nunez Remediation Manager is an agent of the 
Court and is not a federal, State, or local agency or an 
agent thereof. 
The Nunez Remediation Manager is an agent of the Court 
and is not a federal, State, or local agency or an agent 
thereof. 
  
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Plaintiffs object to Defendants proposal.  The Monitoring Team takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team defers to the Court and the parties on this provision. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defendants’ Memorandum of Law SECTION XI: Miscellaneous on pg. 14. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. We think this provision is necessary. To the extent Defendants contend that the Court’s language is inaccurate because the RM is an agent of the Court, Defendants are incorrect. The Court is not a “federal” agency, and so the 
Remediation Manger is not an agent of a federal agency. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ XI, G 
 
Other Terms 
If at any time the Nunez Remediation Manager position 
becomes vacant, the parties and the Monitor shall confer 
on potential replacements and the parties shall meet and 
confer and endeavor to jointly provide the court with no 
more than four candidates to replace the Nunez 
Remediation Manager.  The parties shall submit their 
recommendations, with supporting materials, to the 
Court confidentially.  Once the Court has received the 
parties’ recommendations, the Court shall review the 
proposed candidates, and any further candidates the 
Court, in its discretion, may deem appropriate for 
consideration, and select the new Nunez Remediation 
Manager. 
   
No proposed revisions or objections. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§ XI 
 
Other Terms 
 Nothing in this Order shall limit the effect of Prison 
Litigation Reform Act, 18 U.S.C. § 3626(b).   
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants proposal is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY.  The Monitoring Team takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team defers to the Court and the Parties with respect to this revision. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Obs., SECTION IX: Motion for Termination on pg. 13. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. This additional paragraph proposed by Defendants is unnecessary and superfluous. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§ XI 
 
 The parties shall have at least 20 business days to respond 
to any petition by the Nunez Remediation Manager   
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 46 of 73
46 
Other Terms pursuant to this provision, prior to the Court entering any 
Order in response to the petition.   
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants proposal is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY.  The Monitoring Team takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: We defer to the Court and the Parties on this provision. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs, Objs., SECTION XI: Miscellaneous on pg. 14. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. The Court will set a briefing schedule depending on what the issue is, and we should not predetermine the briefing schedule on issues of unknown substance and complexity, particularly one that is longer than the local rules. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§ XI 
 
Other Terms 
 
To the extent that the Nunez Remediation Manager 
petitions to alter the terms of any Collective Bargaining 
Agreement, or any laws, rules or regulations governing 
the employment of any person by the City, the unions 
representing the affected employees shall be provided the 
same notice and opportunity to be heard as the parties. 
  
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants proposal is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY.  The Monitoring Team takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: We defer to the Court and the Parties on this provision. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs., SECTION XI: Miscellaneous on pg. 14. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. The unions can certainly make a motion to intervene and the court can resolve it in the normal course of such proceedings. This language essentially permits the union to intervene without making the appropriate motion 
which is inappropriate. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§ XI 
 
Other Terms 
 
Other Rights Preserved.  Nothing in this Order shall 
prevent any party or intervener from seeking 
modification or termination of this Order before the 
relief is otherwise terminable pursuant to the terms of 
this Order, to the extent that modification or 
termination would otherwise be legally permissible 
under Fed. R. Civ. P. 60 or other law. 
  
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Plaintiffs object to Defendants proposal.  The Monitoring Team takes no position. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team defers to the Court and the parties on this provision. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs. Objs., SECTION X: Term of Remediation Manager/Objections to Requests on pgs. 13-14. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We oppose. Again, we object to including language from statutes or rules that this Court’s order does not disturb. It is unnecessary and confusing. 
 
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 47 of 73
47 
Section XII: Effective Date 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
§ XII, A 
 
Effective Date 
This Order Appointing the Nunez Remediation Manager 
shall become effective following the appointed Nunez 
Remediation Manager’s confirmation of their 
Acceptance of the powers, responsibilities and duties 
imposed by this Order by signing a copy of this Order 
below and returning the countersigned copy to the Court 
by email addressed to 
SwainNYSDCorresp@nysd.uscourts.gov.  The Order 
shall be effective on the Acceptance Effective Date. 
   
No proposed revisions or objections. 
 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision in 
§  
 
§ XII 
 
Effective Date es 
 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall begin their 
transition into the role by [DA TE] by planning and 
engaging in the logistics for the role.  To effectuate a 
smooth transition, the powers of the Nunez Remediation 
Manager’s shall take effect 90 days from the date of this 
Order. 
 
The Nunez Remediation Manager shall begin 
[his/her] transition into the role by Month Day, Year 
by planning and engaging in the logistics for the role.  
To effectuate a smooth transition, the powers of the 
Nunez Remediation Manager’s shall take effect on 
[Month Day, Year].[We recommend that definitions 
of Particularized Dates should be included in this 
paragraph and the subsequently referenced in 
document (e.g. as it relates to the creation of the 
RAP) once this provision has been finalized by the 
Court (following consultation with the RM and any 
other relevant stakeholders)] 
Summary of Objections/Proposals: The Monitor provides a model for the Court’s consideration regarding the start date for the RM different from the appointment date and consideration for of timing for conferral of authority.  Defendants propose a slightly 
different construction.  Plaintiffs’/SDNY oppose. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitor proposes this language for the Court’s consideration to be finalized after discussion with the RM and the logistics of the initiation of the RM’s work.  Currently the order contemplates that acceptance of the role and the 
initiation of the role will occur on the same day.  As with any new job, an individual will accept a position and begin the work some time after acceptance.  In this case, this is particularly important as the Parties will only learn of the appointment of the RM at the 
time of acceptance (and issuance of the Order), so not only will the RM need time to prepare for the role, but any planning by the Parties (in particular by Defendants) may be needed.  The language proposed is from U.S. v. Hinds Cnty., et al., 3:16-cv-00489 (S.D. 
Miss.), Dkt. 282-4.  We believe it provides a useful model to permit a smooth transition.  While the dual track utilized in Hinds County (the Court first set a date on which the Receiver will begin to develop a Plan, followed by a date at least three months later when 
the Receiver’s control will begin in order to support a smooth and informed transition of authority to the Receiver) may not be necessary, the overall concept we think may be of use.  We appreciate that in other Receivership cases the appointment and conferral on 
authority occurred on the same day, but, in at least one of those cases (Miami), that is because the individual appointed was already working with the agency and the order was entered upon consent.  We recommend the Court set the timing based on discussions with 
the RM to ensure a smooth transition based on the needs of this case and the RM. 
 
Defendants’ Position: Defendants do not object to the proposed change, but add that the transition period should be equivalent to the target date for the completion of the RAP. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: We believe there is no need to define separate “Acceptance Effective Dates” and “Start Dates.” It is entirely possible to manage this process with the two being the same. But in any event, we strongly oppose delaying the conferral of 
authority on the Remediation Manager beyond the date they accept their appointment and start working on this matter. There is no doubt much to learn, but the person appointed will be a professional who has taken on complex roles before, and the Monitor and 
Defendants’ proposals unnecessarily cabin such a professional. There may be specific actions that it is prudent or necessary for the Remediation Manager to take swiftly to effectuate change, and the Court may trust the judgment of its agent in this regard. Completely 
tying the hands of the Remediation Manager for an arbitrary time period unnecessarily builds in yet more delay in a process toward relief that has already been prolonged, in the midst of an ongoing crisis. We think the immediate conferral of authority is consistent 
with Court’s reasoning in the May 13, 2025 Opinion and Order on p.44, rightfully clarifying that development of the RAP is not cause to delay granting the Remediation Manager power: “To be clear, the responsibilities and authority of the Nunez Remediation 
Manager shall not be constrained by the particular stages of the Remediation Action Plan, nor are the powers granted to the Nunez Remediation Manager limited during the time period in which the Remediation Action Plan is being developed.” Other courts have 
acted in line with this Court’s reasoning, conferring authority to receivers immediately on appointment. See Plata v. Schwarzenegger, No. C01-1351, Order Appointing Receiver at 4 (N.D. Cal. Feb. 14, 2006) (Dkt. 473); United States v. Miami-Dade Cnty., No. 13-cv-
21570, Stipulated Order Regarding Appointment of Independent Jail Compliance Director (S.D. Fla. Feb. 16, 2023) (Dkt. 260). 
  
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 48 of 73
48 
RM Order Citation & 
Section Name Text of Proposed RM Order Defendants’ Proposed Revisions Plaintiff Class/SDNY Proposed Revisions Monitor Recommendations 
New Provision/Proposed 
Order  
SEPARATE PROPOSED ORDER REGARDING FEE 
AND EXPENSE  SCHEDULE 
 
1. Prior to final appointment of a Remediation 
Manager, a prospective Nunez Remediation Manager 
shall submit to the City a proposed Schedule of Fees 
and Expenses.  This Schedule shall include an 
estimate of the title and duties of each staff member 
that the Remediation Manager believes will be 
required to exercise the duties of the Remediation 
Manager pursuant to the Court order and a statement 
of the proposed fixed weekly fee for the Remediation 
Manager and each expected member of their staff. 
2. In approving proposed fees the Court will consider 
whether the compensation to be paid to the 
Remediation Manager and each of  their staff is 
commensurate with the salary earned by employees 
of the City of New York serving in comparable roles 
and providing comparable services. 
3. The Remediation Manager and the City shall confer 
in good faith regarding the proposal for fees and 
expenses and to the extent that the City and 
Remediation Manager agree they shall make a joint 
proposal for approval of the statement of fees and 
expenses, to be included as Appendix A to the order 
appointing the Remediation Manager. 
4. To the extent that the City and the prospective 
Remediation Manager disagree regarding the 
Schedule of Fees and Expenses, they shall make 
separate submissions to the Court stating the basis 
for the disagreement. 
1.5. The Court shall approve or modify the proposed 
Schedule of Fees and Expenses, which shall then be 
included as Appendix A to the order appointing the 
Remediation Manager. 
  
Summary of Objections/Proposals: Defendants’ proposal is opposed by Plaintiffs’/SDNY.  The Monitoring Team proposes a different construction of the City’s proposal that adopts some, but not all of this proposal and it is discussed above. 
 
Monitoring Team’s Explanation: The Monitoring Team supports the need for transparency regarding cost estimates before the selection of the RM.  With respect to the proposed language, the Monitoring Team is not sure how this process would work in practice as 
it appears to contemplate that there may be some interim order of appointment, then a fees order, then this order.  That seems confusing and inefficient. The Monitoring Team strongly encourages that discussions about costs and fees must occur before selection by the 
parties, Monitoring Team and the Court.  It is a necessary consideration for selection. Further, we recommend the RM must discuss costs with the City before making a submission to the Court.  These concepts have been addressed via the Monitor’s recommendations 
above. 
 
Defendants’ Position: See Defs, Objs., SECTION VIII: Remediation Manager Compensation and Expenses on pg. 13. 
 
Plaintiffs’/SDNY’s Position: As noted above, we expect that the parties, the Monitor, and the Court will have discussions with Remediation Manager candidates regarding estimated fees and costs as part of the selection process. However, we do not think it is 
reasonable to ask individual candidates to provide a detailed description of their budget and staffing prior to their appointment. The original language in the Court’s order requires the Remediation Manager to submit proposed rates, fees, and expenses within 30 days 
of their appointment, when they will have more information about exactly what consultants or other team member may be necessary and their roles. The original language allows the City an opportunity to object to these proposed rates, costs, and expenses with the 
Court ultimately resolving any disputes. The City’s proposal sets up the possibility of prolonged litigation about the Remediation Member’s team and costs before the Remediation Manager begins work, which will further delay what has already been a prolonged 
period to implement necessary relief to cure Defendants’ contempt.  Once again, Defendants’ proposed additional language is designed to further delay the implementation of the contemplated remedial structure for their widespread contempt.  In addition, as noted 
above, we disagree with setting compensation “commensurate with the salary earned by employees” of NYC, as these positions are not easily comparable, nor are the benefits afforded them (i.e. pension) comparable as neither the Remediation Manager nor his staff 
will be employees of NYC. Further, Defendants do not provide any indication of which City employees they believe are “serving in comparable roles and providing comparable services” to the RM and their staff so it is unclear what fee ranges they believe are 
appropriate. 
 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 49 of 73
CLEAN VERSION OF PROPOSAL FROM MONITORING TEAM 
APPENDIX B: ORDER APPOINTING NUNEZ REMEDIATION MANAGER 
  The Court intends to enter an order in substantially the following form upon the 
selection of the Nunez Remediation Manager.  Any objections to the language of the order must 
be discussed with the Monitoring Team and filed in writing by 12:00 p.m. on June 27, 2025.  
WHEREAS, on October 22, 2015, this Court entered the Consent Judgment (docket entry 
no. 249) in this matter to correct the violation of the constitutional rights of people incarcerated 
in jails operated by the New York City Department of Correction (“DOC” or “the 
Department”)
1; 
WHEREAS, the Consent Judgment required the Defendants to take specific actions to 
remedy a pattern and practice of violence by staff against incarcerated individuals, and to 
develop and implement new practices, policies, and procedures to reduce violence in the jails and 
ensure the safety and well-being of incarcerated individuals; 
WHEREAS, Section XXII, ¶ 1 of the Consent Judgment provides: “The Parties stipulate 
and agree, and the Court finds, that this Agreement complies in all respects with the provisions 
of 18 U.S.C. § 3626(a).  The Parties further stipulate and agree, and the Court finds, that the 
prospective relief in this Agreement is narrowly drawn, extends no further than is necessary to 
correct the violations of federal rights as alleged by the United States and the Plaintiff Class, is 
the least intrusive means necessary to correct these violations, and will not have an adverse 
impact on public safety or the operation of a criminal justice system.  Accordingly, the Parties 
agree and represent that the Agreement complies with the provisions of 18 U.S.C. § 3626(a)”; 
 
1  The Plaintiff Class is defined as “all present and future inmates confined in jails operated 
by the Department, except for the Elmhurst and Bellevue Prison Wards.”  (Docket entry 
no. 249 ¶ II.2.) 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 50 of 73
WHEREAS, on August 14, 2020, the Court entered a Remedial Consent Order 
Addressing Non-Compliance (the “First Remedial Order,” docket entry no. 350) that included 
several remedial measures designed to address the repeated findings of the Nunez Independent 
Monitor (the “Monitor” or “Monitoring Team,” which shall each refer to the Monitor and the 
members of the Monitoring Team) that the Defendants were in non-compliance with core 
provisions of the Consent Judgment, including with Section IV, ¶ 1 (Implementation of Use of 
Force Directive); Section VII, ¶ 1 (Thorough, Timely, Objective Investigations); Section VII, ¶ 7 
(Timeliness of Preliminary Reviews); Section VII, ¶ 9 (a) (Timeliness of Full ID Investigations); 
Section VIII, ¶ 1 (Appropriate and Meaningful Staff Discipline); Section XV, ¶ 1 (Inmates 
Under the Age of 19, Protection from Harm); and Section XV, ¶ 12 (Inmates Under the Age of 
19, Direct Supervision); 
WHEREAS, in his Eleventh Report filed on May 11, 2021 (docket entry no. 368), the 
Monitor reported that the Defendants were not in compliance with numerous provisions of the 
First Remedial Order, including Section A, ¶ 2 (Facility Leadership Responsibilities), Section A, 
¶ 3 (Revised De-escalation Protocol), Section A, ¶ 6 (Facility Emergency Response Teams), 
Section D, ¶ 1 (Consistent Staffing), Section D, ¶ 2 (ii) (Tracking of Incentives and 
Consequences), and Section  D, ¶ 3 (Direct Supervision); 
WHEREAS, the Court entered a Second Remedial Order on September 29, 2021 (docket 
entry no. 398), and a Third Remedial Order on November 22, 2021 (docket entry no. 424);  
WHEREAS, after the three Remedial Orders failed to result in meaningful 
improvements, the Defendants developed an Action Plan, supported by the Monitor, that was 
designed to address Defendants’ overall lack of progress toward compliance by focusing on four 
foundational areas without which reform could not proceed—security practices, supervision and 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 51 of 73
leadership, staffing practices, and accountability—and the  Court entered and So Ordered the 
Action Plan on June 14, 2022 (docket entry no. 465); 
WHEREAS, the Court found that the First Remedial Order, the Second Remedial Order, 
the Third Remedial Order, and the Action Plan were each compliant with the provisions of 18 
U.S.C. § 3626(a) and were necessary to correct the violations of federal rights as alleged by the 
United States and the Plaintiff Class;  
WHEREAS, the First Remedial Order, the Second Remedial Order, the Third Remedial 
Order, and the Action Plan were each entered to address the ongoing non-compliance with the 
Consent Judgment and to achieve its primary goal: to protect the constitutional rights of 
incarcerated people and substantially reduce the level of violence in the jails;  
WHEREAS, the Consent Judgment, the First Remedial Order, the Second Remedial 
Order, the Third Remedial Order, and the Action Plan are hereafter collectively referred to as 
“the Nunez Orders”; 
WHEREAS, more than a year after the Action Plan was entered, the Monitor found in his 
July 10, 2023 Special Report (docket entry no. 557) that the Defendants had not made substantial 
and demonstrable progress in implementing the reforms, initiatives, plans, systems, and practices 
outlined in the Action Plan, and that there had not been a substantial reduction in the risk of harm 
facing incarcerated individuals and DOC staff;  
WHEREAS, on November 17, 2023, the Plaintiff Class and the United States filed a 
Motion for Contempt and Appointment of Receiver; 
WHEREAS, on November 27, 2024, this Court issued its factual findings and decision 
granting Plaintiffs’ Motion for Contempt and found that Defendants (i) are in contempt of 
eighteen core provisions of the Nunez Orders (the “Contempt Provisions”) “that have gone 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 52 of 73
unheeded for years and have highlighted failures inextricably linked to the Department’s historic 
pattern of excessive use of force against persons in custody” (docket entry no. 803, at 52); 
(ii) “have not demonstrated diligent attempts to comply with the Contempt Provisions in a 
reasonable manner” (docket entry no. 803, at 52); and (iii) have repeatedly and consistently 
failed to remediate the violations of the federal rights of incarcerated people that necessitated 
entry of the Consent Judgment (docket entry no. 803, at 52, 54-56); 
WHEREAS, this Court found that the “use of force rate and other rates of violence, self-
harm, and deaths in custody are demonstrably worse than when the Consent Judgment went into 
effect in 2015” and the “unsafe and dangerous conditions in the jails…have become normalized 
despite the fact that they are clearly abnormal and unacceptable” (docket entry no. 803, at 11); 
WHEREAS, this Court found that “for nine years, Defendants made only half-hearted, 
inconsistent efforts to comply with Court orders” (docket entry no. 803, at 50);  
WHEREAS, this Court found that “[t]he record in this case makes clear that those who 
live and work in the jails on Rikers Island are faced with grave and immediate threats of danger, 
as well as actual harm, on a daily basis as a direct result of Defendants’ lack of diligence, and 
that the remedial efforts thus far undertaken by the Court, the Monitoring Team, and the parties 
have not been effective to alleviate this danger” (docket entry no. 803, at 55);  
WHEREAS, this Court found that “Defendants’ ongoing failure to comply” requires a 
remedy that addresses the “insufficiently resourced leadership; a lack of continuity in 
management; failures of supervision and cooperation between supervisors and line officers; a 
lack of skill or imagination to create and implement transformative plans; and an unwillingness 
or inability to cooperate with the Monitoring Team recommendations to accomplish the changes 
necessary” (docket entry no. 803, at 54); 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 53 of 73
WHEREAS, this Court found that “[t]he last nine years also leave no doubt that 
continued insistence on compliance with the Court’s orders by persons answerable principally to 
political authorities would lead only to confrontation and delay; that the current management 
structure and staffing are insufficient to turn the tide within a reasonable period; that Defendants 
have consistently fallen short of the requisite compliance with Court orders for years, at times 
under circumstances that suggest bad faith; and that enormous resources—that the City devotes 
to a system that is at the same time overstaffed and underserved—are not being deployed 
effectively” (docket entry no. 803, at 55-56); and 
WHEREAS, as required by 18 U.S.C. § 3626(a), the prospective relief in this Order is 
narrowly drawn, extends no further than is necessary to correct the violations of federal rights as 
alleged by the Plaintiff Class and the United States, is the least intrusive means necessary to 
correct these violations, and will not have an adverse impact on public safety or the operation of 
a criminal justice system.  
NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, ADJUDGED, AND DECREED as 
follows: 
I. Appointment of Nunez Remediation Manager and Nunez Remediation Manager’s 
Duties   
A. [NAME] is hereby appointed to serve in this case as Nunez Remediation 
Manager, with the responsibility and authority to take all necessary steps to 
promptly achieve Substantial Compliance (defined in Section XX, ¶ 18 of the 
Consent Judgment) with the Contempt Provisions.  
B. The Nunez Remediation Manager’s work shall be guided by the “Remediation 
Action Plan,” a work plan that includes specific and concrete steps and milestones 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 54 of 73
designed to achieve Substantial Compliance with the Contempt Provisions.  The 
Remediation Action Plan is detailed in Section II.A. 
C. The Nunez Remediation Manager shall provide leadership and executive 
management with respect to achieving Substantial Compliance with the Contempt 
Provisions with the goal of developing and implementing a sustainable system 
that protects the constitutional rights of incarcerated people. 
D. The Nunez Remediation Manager shall be answerable only to the Court.   
E. The Nunez Remediation Manager shall maintain an office within Department 
headquarters or on Rikers Island and shall be onsite with sufficient frequency, 
regularity, and duration to carry out their duties. 
II. Development and Implementation of the Remediation Action Plan 
A. The Nunez Remediation Manager, in consultation with the Commissioner and the 
Monitoring Team, shall develop a Remediation Action Plan [Competing 
proposals [Defendants’ Proposal: to complete within two-years after] OR 
[Plaintiffs’/SDNY Proposal: to be executed within the initial two-year period 
following]the Court’s approval of the Remediation Action Plan. Nothing in this 
provision relates to the tenure of the Nunez Remediation Manager, or the duration 
of their authority with respect to a specific Contempt Provision, which is 
governed exclusively by Sections III and IX. 
i. The Remediation Action Plan shall: 
1. include specific and concrete steps that are necessary to achieve 
Substantial Compliance with the Contempt Provisions 
(“Benchmarks”). The Benchmarks shall be organized into 
Case 1:11-cv-05845-LTS     Document 906-1     Filed 09/11/25     Page 55 of 73
priorities with specified milestones to be achieved within 12-month 
periods, beginning with the safety-related areas and actions that are 
most urgently in need of attention; 
2. include transformative and sustainable initiatives which shall 
include any positive initiatives currently unde