more 
 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
JOCELYN E. STRAUBER 
COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE Release #49-2025 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 3, 2025 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
  
DOI EXAMINED FIVE INCIDENTS AND IDENTIFIED ONE WHERE AN NYPD OFFICER VIOLATED LAWS 
THAT LIMIT ASSISTANCE WITH CIVIL IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT; 
DOI FOUND THAT THE NYPD’S POLICIES COMPLY WITH THE LAW AND 
ISSUED SEVEN RECOMMENDATIONS FOR IMPROVEMENT, WHICH THE NYPD HAS ACCEPTED   
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Investigation (“DOI”), issued a 
Report today on the New York City Police Department’s (“NYPD”) compliance with Local Laws and executive orders 
restricting assistance with federal civil immigration enforcement  and related NYPD policies. The investigation was 
prompted by a referral from City Council Speaker Adrienne Adams  and Chair of the Oversight and Investigations 
Committee Gale Brewer, concerning media reports of two incidents  that raised questions about NYPD’s potential 
involvement in such enforcement. The Report issued today addresses those incidents, as well as three others 
identified during the investigation – one through public media reports, one disclosed by the NYPD and one through 
DOI’s investigative work. DOI also examined the NYPD’s policies pertaining to civil immigration enforcement and 
found that the NYPD has been working diligently to ensure that its policies comply with local laws, while still 
permitting critical partnerships with federal law enforcement on criminal investigations.  DOI concluded that the 
NYPD’s current policies and procedures, particularly as  strengthened and enhanced by a series of policy reforms 
that the NYPD implemented in 2025, both before and after DOI began its investigation, comply with City law . 
However, DOI identified one incident in which an officer violated local law  by providing assistance to federal 
authorities in connection with enforcement of the federal civil immigration law , found that the NYPD does not fully 
comply with documentation and reporting requirements concerning requests for assistance  with federal civil 
immigration enforcement, and also found gaps in the NYPD’s current policies and practices that raise the risk of  
improper information sharing or assistance to federal authorities for purposes of civil immigration enforcement .  
 
DOI issued seven recommendations to improve NYPD policies and practices, each of which NYPD has 
accepted. DOI found that several NYPD policies lack the clarity necessary to ensure consistent responses to 
requests for assistance with civil immigration enforcement and that NYPD officers  would benefit from improved 
training on the policies’ requirements. A copy of the Report follows this release and can also be found at this link: 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/doi/newsroom/public-reports-current.page
  
 
DOI Commissioner Jocelyn E. Strauber said, “ New York City’s  laws and executive orders  limit local 
authorities’ assistance with enforcement of the federal civil immigration l aws, but do not restrict vital federal and 
local cooperation in the enforcement of most criminal laws , striking a delicate balance that is being tested in 
unprecedented ways . DOI’s investigation of NYPD’s compliance in five separate incidents demonstrates the 
complexities and challenges that NYPD faces in the current environment . DOI found that the NYPD has been 
working to strengthen its policies in this area and identified one instance, of the five investigated, in which an officer 
provided assistance in violation of local law . However, DOI did find gaps in the Department’s current policies and 
practices that increase the risk of improper information sharing or assistance, as well as a failure to fully document 

2 
 
and report federal requests for immigration- related assist ance, and made seven recommendations intended to 
ensure the implementation of uniform procedures and mitigate the risk of improper information- sharing or 
assistance, which the NYPD has accepted.  I thank the NYPD for its cooperation in this investigation and 
commitment to compliance with the laws and executive orders pertaining to federal civil immigration enforcement .” 
 
On June 9, 2025, the Speaker of the New York City Council and the Chair of its Oversight and Investigations 
Committee alerted the DOI to media reports suggesting that, at least in some cases, the NYPD may not have been 
honoring the City’s laws restricting cooperation with federal authorities conducting civil immigration enforcement. In 
light of those reports, the Speaker and Chair requested an investigation of NYPD’s compliance with these laws . 
The Report summarizes the findings of DOI’s investigation and the key conclusions are below.   
 
1. Merwil Gutiérrez Flores: On February 25, 2025, the NYPD transferred Merwil Gutiérrez Flores fr om 
NYPD custody into Federal Bureau of Investigation (“FBI”) custody following Mr. Gutiérrez Flores’s 
arrest for possession of a firearm and the Bronx County District Attorney’s decision not to prosecute 
Mr. Gutiérrez Flores. The FBI promptly transferred Mr. Gutiérrez Flores into civil immigration detention. 
The NYPD transferred Mr. Gutiérrez Flores into FBI custody pending potential federal criminal charges, 
after FBI informed the NYPD that federal prosecutors were contemplating such charges. Therefore, 
DOI concluded that the NYPD’s actions — the transfer of Gutiérrez Flores into federal custody — did 
not violate NYPD policies or local laws restricting cooperation with civil immigration enforcement.  
Nevertheless, the NYPD has accepted DOI’s recommendation to enhance the Department’s review of 
the rationale for all custodial transfers to federal agents to help prevent the NYPD from transferring 
individuals into immigration custody unwittingly. 
 
2. Leqaa Kordia: On March 14, 2025, the NYPD provided Homeland Security Investigations (“HSI”) with 
information about a prior arrest of Leqaa Kordia pursuant to a request for assistance in what HSI 
represented to the NYPD was a money laundering investigation. Those records were subsequently 
used during civil immigration proceedings against Ms. Kordia. As the NYPD has publicly acknowledged, 
the prior arrest information should not have been disclosed to HSI because the arrest records were 
sealed.  DOI concluded that the NYPD’s actions did not violate NYPD policies or local laws restricting 
cooperation with civil immigration enforcement because the NYPD disclosed information to HSI based 
on HSI’s stated need for assistance with a criminal investigation. Nevertheless, after this incident, and 
before DOI’s investigation began, the NYPD changed its policies to require more thorough scrutiny of 
federal law enforcement agencies’ stated justifications for requesting information.  
 
3. The Row and Roosevelt H otels: While planning a criminal warrant sweep of the Row and the 
Roosevelt Hotels in early March 2025, the NYPD learned that its federal partners at HSI intended to 
conduct a simultaneous operation at the same locations to execute criminal illegal entry and re- entry 
warrants—activity that local law prohibits the NYPD from participating in. DOI found no evidence that 
the team responsible for planning the Row and Roosevelt Hotel operation coordinated with HSI in 
violation of local law. Moreover, when HSI’s planned execution of illegal entry and re- entry warrants 
became apparent, NYPD executives cancelled the NYPD’s Row and the Roosevelt Hotel operation, 
preventing the agency from participating in an operation that could have involved prohibited immigration 
enforcement. 
 
4. HSI Violent Gang Task Force Request:  On November 21, 2024, an NYPD officer on an HSI Violent 
Gang Task Force received a request from his federal counterparts for alerts to be placed on a list of 
individuals subject to potential civil immigra tion enforcement, so that the NYPD officer would receive 
an automated email if the individuals interacted with the NYPD. The officer honored that request in 
violation of NYPD policy and local law. The NYPD was not aware of this incident before it was brought 
to the NYPD’s attention by DOI. The NYPD has since removed the officer from his task force 
assignment and restricted his access to the computer systems through which he placed the alerts. The 
disciplinary process is ongoing.  However, the NYPD has uncovered no evidence that NYPD officers 
took any actions as a result of the officer’s alert notifications. 
 
5. Federal Fugitive Request: On June 18, 2025, an FBI agent and a Department of Homeland Security 
(“DHS”) agent asked two police officers to temporarily detain an individual who had escaped from civil 
immigration detention while being transported, so that the federal agents could retrieve their vehicles, 
which had been abandoned in pursuit of the individual. Given the nature of the requests, the officers 
3 
 
informed their supervisor, who acquiesced to the federal agents’ request. The NYPD detained the 
immigration detainee for approximately twenty minutes. While this incident arguably violated the 
NYPD’s policy prohibiting NYPD officials from “[d]etaining an individual so that federal civil immigration 
agents can take that person into custody,” the NYPD’s actions appear to have been reasonable under 
the exigent circumstances presented, particularly given that the detainee had just escaped from federal 
custody, a crime under federal law. 
 
In addition to these incidents, DOI assessed the NYPD’s compliance with several provisions of local law 
that impose recordkeeping, reporting, and guideline-adoption requirements related to civil immigration enforcement. 
As described in further detail below, DOI found the following: 
 
 Local Law 59 of 2014:  Local Law 59 requires the NYPD to post annual reports on its websites 
summarizing information about the civil immigration detainer requests it received in the prior year. 
DOI found that the NYPD complies with this reporting requirement. 
 
 Local Law 228 of 2017:  Local Law 228 requires City agencies to document each request for 
assistance with civil immigration enforcement and the City (through the Mayor’s Office of Immigrant 
Affairs (“MOIA”)) to transmit a quarterly report summarizing that data to the City Council. DOI found 
that the NYPD does not comply with this law, because its documentation of requests is 
underinclusive and does not contain the level of detail required by local law and other City policies. 
Relatedly, the NYPD does not transmit all of the requi red information to MOIA for its quarterly 
reports and, as a result, those reports are also non-compliant with local law. 
 
 Local Law 246 of 2017:  Local Law 246 of 2017 requires City agencies to adopt policies limiting 
the access of non-local law enforcement agents to City property. DOI found that the NYPD has not 
adopted such a policy, apart from general policy statements prohibiting the use of City property to 
assist in immigration enforcement, and is therefore non- compliant with Local Law 246. When DOI 
brought this issue to the NYPD’s attention, it promptly began working on a policy to come into 
compliance with the law. 
 
In order to further improve the NYPD’s practices, DOI has made seven recommendations, each of  which 
the NYPD has agreed to implement: 
 
Recommendation 1: Unlike the NYPD’s general policies on cooperation with civil immigration enforcement 
efforts, NYPD policies governing detainer requests currently apply only when “federal civil immigration 
agents present a member of service with papers to take an individual from Department custody.” As the 
case of Mr. Gutiérrez Flores highlights, even more informal requests from federal agents that do not 
primarily engage in civil immigration enforcement can have immediate immigration consequences, 
particularly in light of current federal practice, in which an expanded group of federal agencies are 
responsible for immigration enforcement. To better implement local law restrictions, the NYPD should 
amend its policies to require enhanced review of all custody transfers to federal agents, not only transfers 
to “federal civil immigration agents” who present the NYPD with formal detainer paperwork. 
 
Recommendation 2: The NYPD’s written policies for responding to detainer requests from federal agents 
are currently memorialized in a single paragraph of a general civil immigration enforcement policy and that 
paragraph is in some respects inconsistent with the practices, not memorialized in writing, that the NYPD 
follows in responding to those requests. The NYPD should adopt a standalone policy on requests for 
custodial transfers from federal agents that addresses, at a minimum: (1) what kinds of detention requests 
are subject to the policy (incorporating Recommendation #1, above, by ensuring that informal requests and 
requests from non-civil immigration agents are scrutinized); (2) what documentation and information should 
be collected to process a request; (3) the appropriate NYPD division to which detainer requests should be 
directed; and (4) the standards against which decisions whether to honor detainer requests should be 
assessed. 
 
Recommendation 3: The NYPD has four separate policy documents governing how NYPD officers should 
respond to requests for assistance with civil immigration enforcement. None of those policies provide 
officers with sufficient guidance to help them determine when they are in situations in which assisting federal 
agents could violate local law restrictions on civil immigration enforcement. And two of the NYPD’s policies 
4 
 
provide different protocol for responding to requests for civil immigration enforcement than the other two 
provide. The NYPD should improve its policies for processing requests for assistance from federal agents 
by providing additional guidance on: (1) how an officer should assess whether the request is for assistance 
with civil immigration enforcement; and (2) routing requests for information about unknown subjects. In its 
revised policies, the NYPD should also require task force officers to document the steps they took to confirm 
that a federal request was not one for assistance with civil immigration enforcement .   
 
Recommendation 4: Several of the incidents studied by DOI revealed inconsistency within the NYPD as 
to when and how requests for assistance with civil immigration enforcement should be documented and 
reported. Accordingly, the NYPD should provide officers with further training on when and how to report 
and document requests for assistance from federal law enforcement.  
 
Recommendation 5: The records that the NYPD maintains regarding requests for assistance with civil 
immigration enforcement lack sufficient information to establish the nature of the request received and the 
actions the NYPD took in response to the request, as required by Local Law 228. Moreover, the NYPD 
does not track the requesting agency, as required by mayoral guidance. Finally, the NYPD has not reported 
non-detainer requests for assistance with civil immigration enforcement to MOIA for MOIA’s quarterly Local 
Law 228 reports, as is required by law. The NYPD should improve its recordkeeping and reporting pursuant 
to Local Law 228. 
 
Recommendation 6: The paucity of the non-detainer entries in the NYPD’s databases for tracking requests 
for assistance with immigration enforcement (and the absence of events like the HSI Violent Gang Task 
Force request from those databases) raises questions about whether the NYPD has a complete 
understanding of the frequency with which its members are receiving requests for assistance with civil 
immigration enforcement. To better understand its own compliance with local laws, the NYPD should 
conduct an email audit of NYPD members assigned to federal task forces to ensure their compliance with 
local law. 
 
Recommendation 7: The NYPD has not adopted a policy to restrict non- local law enforcement officers 
from the City property under its control, as is required by Local Law 246 of 2017. Accordingly, the NYPD 
should adopt guidelines implementing Local Law 246. 
 
DOI Commissioner Jocelyn E. Strauber thanks NYPD Commissioner Jessica S. Tisch and her staff,  
including Deputy Commissioner of Legal Matters Michael Gerber and Agency Privacy Officer  Emily Gold, for their 
cooperation in this investigation.  
 
At DOI, the investigation was conducted by Special Investigative Counsel Zachary Bannon in DOI’s Office 
of the Inspector General for Special Investigations, Special Counsel to the Inspectors General Danielle Muniz, and 
Investigative Attorney Edward Pruette. The investigation was supervised by Senior Inspector General Andrew Sein, 
Deputy Commissioner of Strategic Initiatives Christopher Ryan, and Deputy Commissioner/Chief of Investigations 
Dominick Zarrella. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
DOI is one of the oldest law-enforcement agencies in the country and New York City’s corruption watchdog. Investigations 
may involve any agency, officer, elected official or employee of the City, as well as those who do business with or receive benefits 
from the City. DOI’s strategy attacks corruption comprehensively through systemic investigations that lead to high-impact arrests, 
preventive internal controls and operational reforms that improve the way the City runs. 
 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
 
 
 
 
  
 
New York City 
Department of Investigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber 
Commissioner 
 
Andrew Sein 
Inspector General for Special Investigations 
 
 
December 2025 
 
 
DOI Investigation into the NYPD’s 
Compliance with Local Laws  
Restricting City Assistance with  
Immigration Enforcement 
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents
 
 
I. Executive Summary ......................................................................................................................................... 1 
II. New York City “Sanctuary” Laws and Executive Orders ....................................................................................... 6 
III. City Council Referral dated June 9, 2025 ........................................................................................................... 9 
IV. The NYPD’s Policies on Civil Immigration Enforcement ..................................................................................... 12 
A. The NYPD’s Written Policies from 2019 to 2025 ............................................................................................ 12 
B. The NYPD’s Written Policies Since 2025 ...................................................................................................... 16 
V. Discussion of Reported Incidents .................................................................................................................... 19 
A. Merwil Gutiérrez Flores ............................................................................................................................... 20 
B. Leqaa Kordia ............................................................................................................................................. 22 
C. Planned Operation at the Roosevelt and Row Hotels ..................................................................................... 25 
D. Task Force Request ................................................................................................................................... 28 
E. Federal Fugitive Incident ............................................................................................................................. 29 
VI. Compliance with Other Local Law Requirements .............................................................................................. 32 
A. Local Law 59 of 2014: NYPD Annual Report on Civil Immigration Detainer Requests ....................................... 32 
B. Local Law 228 of 2017: City-wide Agency Reports on Requests for Assistance with Civil Immigration Enforcement
 33  
C. Local Law 246 of 2017: Agency Policies on Restricting Access of Law Enforcement Officers to City Property ..... 36 
VII. Findings and Recommendations ..................................................................................................................... 37 
A. Recommendation #1: The NYPD Should Amend its Policies to Require Enhanced Review of All Custody Transfers 
to Federal Agents, Not Only Transfers to “Federal Civil Immigration Agents.” ........................................................... 38 
B. Recommendation #2: The NYPD Should Update and Formalize its Procedure for Responding to Detainer 
Requests from Federal Agents into a Comprehensive Written Policy. ...................................................................... 39 
C. Recommendation #3: The NYPD Should Improve Its Policies for Processing Requests for Assistance from Federal 
Agents by Providing Additional Guidance. ............................................................................................................ 40 
D. Recommendation #4: The NYPD Should Provide Officers with Further Training on When and How to Report and 
Document Requests for Assistance from Federal Law Enforcement. ....................................................................... 42 
E. Recommendation #5: The NYPD Should Improve Its Recordkeeping and Reporting Pursuant to Local Law 228. 42 
F. Recommendation #6: The NYPD Should Conduct an Email Audit of NYPD Members Assigned to Federal Task 
Forces. ............................................................................................................................................................. 43 
G. Recommendation #7: The NYPD Should Adopt Guidelines Implementing Local Law 246. ................................. 43 
VIII. Conclusion .................................................................................................................................................... 44 
 
 
  
  
 
  
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 1  
 
I. Executive Summary 
 
Since Mayor Ed Koch issued Executive Order No. 124 in 1989, New York City 
has restricted its officers and employees from assisting federal authorities in civil 
immigration enforcement. The City’s laws and policies implementing this restriction 
are designed to ensure that un documented immigrants have access to City services. 
In the statement of basis and purpose accompanying Executive Order No. 124, Mayor 
Koch explained that many immigrants “who reside in the City fail to make use of 
[City] services, largely from fear that an y contact with a government agency will 
bring them to the attention of federal immigration authorities.” Mayor Koch 
continued: “It is to the disadvantage of all City residents if some who live in the City 
are uneducated, inadequately protected from crime, or untreated for illness.” And so 
the City began “preserv[ing] the confidentiality of all information respecting law -
abiding aliens.” 
 
On June 9, 2025, the Speaker of the New York City Council and the Chair of 
its Oversight and Investigations Committee wrote a letter to the Commissioner of the 
Department of Investigation (“DOI”) alerting DOI to media reports suggesting that, 
at least in some cases, the New York City Police Department (“NYPD”) may not have 
been honoring the City’s laws restricting cooperation with federal authorities 
conducting civil immigration enforcement. Given those reports, the Council Members 
requested that DOI investigate whether the NYPD had violated City laws or 
circumvented their intent. This report summarizes the findings of DOI’s 
investigation. 
 
Broadly, DOI has concluded that the NYPD has been working diligently to 
ensure that its policies with respect to assisting federal law enforcement agencies 
comply with local laws, while still permitting the NYPD to partner with federal law 
enforcement on criminal investigations. However, DOI identified one incident in 
which an officer violated local law, and several instances discussed in this report 
highlight gaps in the agency’s current policies and practices that raise the risk of  
improper information sharing or assistance to federal authorities for purposes of civil 
immigration enforcement. Accordingly, in this report, DOI makes several policy 
recommendations that are intended to mitigate the risk that NYPD officers may 
disclose information to federal law enforcement, unaware that the information will 
be used to assist in civil immigration enforcement.  
 
During its investigation, DOI examined the NYPD’s policies implementing 
local laws restricting City cooperation with civil immigration en forcement and 
investigated five incidents, including two identified by the City Council, in which the 
NYPD’s compliance with those laws were implicated. As explained in more detail 
below, DOI made the following findings regarding those incidents: 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 2  
 
 
1. Merwil Gutiérrez Flores: On February 25, 2025, the NYPD transferred 
Merwil Gutiérrez Flores from NYPD custody into Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (“FBI”) custody following Mr. Gutiérrez Flores’s arrest for 
possession of a firearm and the Bronx County District Att orney’s decision 
not to prosecute Mr. Gutiérrez Flores. The FBI promptly transferred Mr. 
Gutiérrez Flores into civil immigration detention. The  NYPD transferred 
Mr. Gutiérrez Flores into FBI custody pending potential federal criminal 
charges, after the FBI informed the NYPD that federal prosecutors were 
contemplating such charges . Therefore, DOI concluded that the NYPD’s 
actions—the transfer of Mr. Gutiérrez Flores  into federal custody—did n ot 
violate NYPD policies or local laws restricting cooperation with civil 
immigration enforcement.  Nevertheless, the NYPD has accepted DOI’s 
recommendation to enhance its review of the rationale for all custodial 
transfers to federal agents to help prevent  the NYPD from transferring 
individuals into immigration custody unwittingly. 
 
2. Leqaa Kordia:  On March 14, 2025, the NYPD provided Homeland 
Security Investigations (“HSI”) with information about a prior arrest of 
Leqaa Kordia pursuant to a request for assistance in what HSI represented 
to the NYPD  was a money laundering investigation. Those records were 
subsequently used during civil immigration proceedings against Ms. 
Kordia. As the NYPD has publicly acknowledged, that the prior arrest  
information shoul d not have been disclosed to HSI because the arrest 
records were sealed. DOI concluded that the NYPD’s actions did not violate 
NYPD policies or local laws restricting cooperation with civil immigration 
enforcement because the NYPD disclosed information to HSI based on 
HSI’s stated need for assistance with a criminal investigation. 
Nevertheless, after this incident and before DOI’s investigation began, the 
NYPD changed its policies to require more thorough scrutiny of federal law 
enforcement agencies’ stated justifications for requesting information.  
 
3. The Row and Roosevelt Hotels : While planning a criminal warrant 
sweep of the Row and the Roosevelt Hotels in early March 2025, the NYPD 
learned that its federal partners at HSI intended to conduct a simultaneous 
operation at the same locations to execute criminal illegal entry and re-
entry warrants —activity that local law prohibits the NYPD from 
participating in. DOI found no evidence that  the team responsible for 
planning the Row and Roosevelt Hotel operation coordinated with HSI in 
violation of local law. Moreover, when HSI’s planned execution of illegal 
entry and re-entry warrants became apparent, NYPD executives cancelled 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 3  
 
the Row and the Roosevelt Hotel operation, preventing the agency from 
participating in an operation that could have involved prohibited 
immigration enforcement. 
 
4. HSI Violent Gang Task Force Request : On November 21, 2024, an 
NYPD officer on an HSI Violent Gang Task Force received a request from 
his federal counterparts for alerts to be placed on a list of individuals 
subject to potential civil immigration enforcement, so that the NYPD officer 
would receive an automated email if the individuals interacted with the 
NYPD. The officer honored that request in violation of NYPD policy and 
local law. The NYPD was not aware of this incident before it was brought 
to the NYPD’s attention by DOI. The NYPD has since removed the officer 
from his task force assignment and restricted his  access to the computer 
systems through which he placed the alerts. The disciplinary process is 
ongoing. However, the NYPD has uncovered no evidence that NYPD officers 
took any actions as a result of the officer’s alert notifications. 
 
5. Federal Fugitive Request: On June 18, 2025, an FBI and a Department 
of Homeland Security (“DHS”) agent asked two police officers to 
temporarily detain an individual who had escaped from civil immigration 
detention while being transported, so that the federal agents could retrieve 
their vehicles, which had been abandoned in pursuit of the individual. 
Given the nature of the requests, the officers informed their supervisor, who 
acquiesced to the federal agents’ request. The NYPD detained the 
immigration detainee for approximatel y twenty minutes. While this 
incident arguably violated the NYPD’s policy prohibiting NYPD officials 
from “[d]etaining an individual so that federal civil immigration agents can 
take that person into custody,” the NYPD’s actions appear to have been 
reasonable under the exigent circumstances presented, particularly given 
that the detainee had just escaped from custody, a crime under federal law. 
 
In addition to these incidents, DOI assessed the NYPD’s compliance with 
several provisions of local law that impo se recordkeeping, reporting, and guideline -
adoption requirements related to civil immigration enforcement. As described in 
further detail below, DOI found the following about the NYPD’s compliance with 
those provisions: 
 
1. Local Law 59 of 2014 : Local Law 59 requires the NYPD to post annual 
reports on its websites summarizing information about the civil 
immigration detainer requests it received in the prior year. DOI found that 
the NYPD complies with this reporting requirement. 
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 4  
 
2. Local Law 228 of 2017: Local Law 228 requires City agencies to document 
each request for assistance with civil immigration enforcement and the City 
(through the Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs (“MOIA”)) to transmit a 
quarterly report summarizing that data to the City Council. DOI found that 
the NYPD does not comply with this law, because its documentation of 
requests is underinclusive and does not contain the level of detail required 
by local law and other City policies. Relatedly, the NYPD does not transmit 
all of the required information to MOIA for its quarterly reports and, as a 
result, those reports are also non-compliant with local law. 
 
3. Local Law 246 of 2017: Local Law 246 of 2017 requires City agencies to 
adopt policies limiting the access of non -local law enforcement agents to 
City property. DOI found that the NYPD has not adopted such a policy, 
apart from general policy statements prohibiting the use of City property 
to assist in immigration enforcement, and is therefore non -compliant with 
Local Law 246. When DOI brought this issue to the NYPD’s attention, it 
promptly began working on a policy to come into compliance with the law. 
 
To summarize, DOI’s investigation found that most of the NYPD’s policies and 
procedures comply with City law, particularly after a series of policy reforms that the 
NYPD has implemented since the beginning of 2025, both before and after DOI began 
its investigation. The NYPD cooperated fully with DOI’s investigation and 
proactively worked to address several deficiencies that were highlighted as DOI’s 
investigation was underway. 
 
Nevertheless, DOI identified several ways in which the NYPD’s policies and 
practices can be improved in order to better comply with local law. In particular, 
several NYPD policies lack the clarity necessary to ensure  consistent responses to 
requests for assistance with civil immigration enforcement and NYPD officers should 
be better trained on their obligations under the NYPD’s policies. Clarifying policies 
and providing adequate training on them would help prevent situations where NYPD 
officers violate local law (as in the HSI Violent Gang Task Force incident) or where 
officers appear to lack confidence in their decisions (which, as discussed below, may 
have been the case in the federal fugitive incident). Furthermore, the NYPD has not 
yet fully implemented several policies necessary to fulfill the reporting and record -
keeping requirements of Local Law 228 and 246 of 2017. 
 
 In order to further improve the NYPD’s practices, DOI has made seven 
recommendations, each of which the NYPD has agreed to implement: 
 
Recommendation 1 : Unlike the NYPD’s general policies on 
cooperation with civil immigration enforcement efforts, NYPD policies 
governing detainer requests currently apply only when “federal civil 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 5  
 
immigration agents present a member of service with papers to take an 
individual from Department custody.” As the case of Mr. Gutiérrez 
Flores highlights, even more informal requests from federal agents that 
do not primarily engage in civil immigration enforcement can have 
immediate immigration consequences, particularly in light of current 
federal practice, in which an expanded group of federal agencies are 
responsible for immigration enforcement. To better implement local law 
restrictions, the NYPD should amend its policies t o require enhanced 
review of all custody transfers to federal agents, not only transfers to 
“federal civil immigration agents” who present the NYPD with formal 
detainer paperwork. 
 
Recommendation 2 : The NYPD’s written policies for responding to 
detainer requests from federal agents is currently memorialized in a 
single paragraph of a general civil immigration enforcement policy and 
is in some respects inconsistent with the practices, not memorialized in 
writing, that the NYPD follows in responding to those requests. The 
NYPD should adopt a standalone policy on requests for custodial 
transfers from federal agents that addresses, at a minimum: (1) what 
kinds of detention requests are subject to the policy (incorporating 
Recommendation #1, above, by ensuring th at informal requests and 
requests from non -civil immigration agents are scrutinized); (2) what 
documentation and information should be collected to process a request; 
(3) the appropriate NYPD division to which detainer requests should be 
directed; and (4) the standards against which decisions whether to honor 
detainer requests should be assessed. 
 
Recommendation 3: The NYPD has four separate policy documents 
governing how NYPD officers should respond to requests for assistance 
with civil immigration enforce ment. None of those policies provide 
officers with sufficient guidance to help them determine when they are 
in situations in which assisting federal agents could violate local law 
restrictions on civil immigration enforcement. And two of the NYPD’s 
policies provide different protocol for responding to requests for civil 
immigration enforcement than the other two provide. The NYPD should 
improve its policies for processing requests for assistance from federal 
agents by providing additional guidance on: (1) h ow an officer should 
assess whether the request is for assistance with civil immigration 
enforcement; and (2) routing requests for information about unknown 
subjects. In its revised policies, the NYPD should also require task force 
officers to document the steps they took to confirm that a federal request 
was not one for assistance with civil immigration enforcement.   
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 6  
 
Recommendation 4: Several of the incidents studied by DOI revealed 
inconsistency within the NYPD as to when and how requests for 
assistance with civil immigration enforcement should be documented 
and reported. Accordingly, the NYPD should provide officers with 
further training on when and how to report and document requests for 
assistance from federal law enforcement. 
 
Recommendation 5: The records that the NYPD maintains regarding 
requests for assistance with civil immigration enforcement lack 
sufficient information to establish the nature of the request received and 
the actions the NYPD took in response to the request, as required by 
Local L aw 228. Moreover, the NYPD does not track the requesting 
agency, as required by mayoral guidance. Finally, the NYPD has not 
reported non -detainer requests for assistance with civil immigration 
enforcement to MOIA for MOIA’s quarterly Local Law 228 reports, as is 
required by law. The NYPD should improve its recordkeeping and 
reporting pursuant to Local Law 228. 
 
Recommendation 6 : The paucity of the non- detainer entries in the 
NYPD’s databases for tracking requests for assistance with immigration 
enforcement (and the absence of events like the HSI Violent Gang Task 
Force request from those databases) raises questions about whether the 
NYPD has a complete understanding of the frequency with which its 
members are receiving requests for assistance with civil immi gration 
enforcement. To better understand its own compliance with local laws, 
the NYPD should conduct an email audit of NYPD members assigned to 
federal task forces to ensure their compliance with local law. 
 
Recommendation 7: The NYPD has not adopted a po licy to restrict 
non-local law enforcement officers from the City property under its 
control, as is required by Local Law 246 of 2017. Accordingly, the NYPD 
should adopt guidelines implementing Local Law 246. 
 
Implementation of these recommendations will h elp the NYPD ensure that it 
complies with local law. 
 
II. New York City “Sanctuary” Laws and Executive Orders 
 
For more than three decades, New York City has operated under laws and 
policies that restrict the use of City time, resources, and personnel to facil itate civil 
immigration enforcement. In 1989, Mayor Ed Koch signed Executive Order No. 124, 
which prohibited City officers and employees from transmitting information about 
any non-citizen to federal immigration authorities unless they were required by law  
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 7  
 
to make a disclosure, had the written consent of the non-citizen, or suspected the non-
citizen of engaging in criminal activity.1  
 
In 1996, Congress passed laws meant to counteract local laws like Mayor 
Koch’s executive order. Those laws “provid[ed] that  no state or local government 
entity may be restricted from exchanging information with the [Immigration and 
Naturalization Service] regarding the immigration status, lawful or unlawful, of 
individuals in the United States.”
2 Mayor Rudolph Giuliani refused  to rescind 
Executive Order No. 124 and instead sought a ruling on the constitutionality of the 
federal laws. In 1997, the City’s suit was dismissed
3 and in 1999, the Second Circuit 
affirmed dismissal, holding that the 1996 laws’ interference with Executive Order No. 
124 was permissible.4   
 
In 2003, faced with uncertainty over the City’s immigration policies, Mayor 
Michael Bloomberg issued Executive Order No. 34, rescinding Executive Order No. 
124 and replacing it with a prohibition on City officers and em ployees from 
“inquir[ing] about a person’s immigration status,” unless those inquiries were in 
furtherance of law enforcement operations, were relevant to the provision of or 
determination of eligibility for City services, or were otherwise required by law .
5 
Facing backlash from City Council Members and immigrant advocates on the basis 
that a “don’t ask” policy (as opposed to a “don’t tell” policy) was insufficiently 
protective of the City’s immigrant communities,
6 Mayor Bloomberg issued Executive 
Order No. 41 in September 2003, amending Executive Order No. 34.7 Executive Order 
No. 41 prohibited City officers and employees from disclosing “confidential 
information,” including information about an individual’s immigration status, unless 
                                                        
1 Exec. Order No. 124 § 2 (Aug. 7, 1989). 
2 Section 434 of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, Pub. L. 
No. 104- 13, 110 Stat. 2105 (1996); see also  Section 642 of the Illegal Immigration Reform and 
Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-208, 110 Stat. 3009 (1996) (expanding on § 434’s 
prohibitions). 
3 City of New York v. United States, 971 F. Supp. 789 (S.D.N.Y. 1997). 
4 City of New York v. United States, 179 F.3d 29 (2d Cir. 1999). 
5 Exec. Order No. 34 § 3 (May 13, 2003); see also id. § 4 (“Police officers and peace officers, including 
members of the Police Department and the Department of Correction, shall continue to cooperate with 
federal authorities in investigating and apprehending aliens suspected of criminal activity.”). 
6 Susan Sachs, Mayor’s New Immigrant Policy, Intended to Help, Raises Fears, THE N.Y. TIMES (July 
23, 2003), available at https://www.nytimes.com/2003/07/23/nyregion/mayor-s-new-immigrant-policy-
intended-to-help-raises-fears.html. 
7 Exec. Order No. 41 (Sept. 17, 2003). 
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 8  
 
the disclosure was authorized by the individual, required by law, or made in 
furtherance of criminal law enforcement objectives.8 
 
The City Council first began regulating the City’s cooperation with federal 
immigration authorities in 2011 9 and passed its first law specific to the NYPD’s 
cooperation with federal immigration authorities in 2013 —Local Law 21 of 2013. 10 
Local Law 21 prohibited the NYPD from honoring civil immigration detainers unless: 
(1) the subject of the detainer had been convicted of a covered crime, had a pendin g 
covered criminal case, had an outstanding criminal warrant, was a known gang 
member, or was a possible match in the terrorist screening database; or (2) the 
individual was the subject of a warrant of removal or a final order of removal.
11 In 
2014, the Cou ncil passed Local Law 59, imposing additional restrictions on the 
NYPD’s ability to honor civil immigration detainers.12 That law, codified at New York 
City Administrative Code §  14-154, provides that the NYPD may honor a civil 
immigration detainer only if it is accompanied by a judicial warrant, and the NYPD 
determines that the individual subject to the detainer has been convicted of a violent 
or serious crime or is a possible match in the terrorist screening database.
13 The 
NYPD is required to issue a publi c report summarizing information about the 
detainer requests it receives every year.14 
 
                                                        
8 Id. §§ 1-2. Executive Order No. 41 was written more broadly than Executive Order No. 124, 
restricting the disclosure of “confidential information” to any third party rather than the disclosure of 
just “information respecting any alien” to “federal immigration authorities.” Compare Exec. Order No. 
41 § 1 with Exec. Order No. 124 §  2. Under Second Circuit law, this change brought Executive Order 
No. 41 outside the scope of t he 1996 laws’  prohibitions. See City of New York , 179 F.3d at 36 
(distinguishing Executive Order No. 124 from “a general policy that limits the disclosure of confidential 
information to only specific persons or agencies or prohibits such dissemination generally”). 
9 Local Law No. 62 (2011) of City of New York (limiting the circumstances in which the Department of 
Correction would honor civil immigration detainers). 
10 Local Law No. 21 (2013) of City of New York. 
11 Id. 
12 The City Council passed the stricter requirements of Local Law 59 of 2014 after “a number of 
courts . . . decided that local authorities do not need to comply with ICE detainer requests,” reasoning 
that “honoring such requests without an underlying finding of probable cause may raise civil rights 
concerns.” New York City Council, Council to Vote on Legislation Banning Warrantless ICE Detainers 
(Oct. 22, 2014), available at  https://council.nyc.gov/press/2014/10/22/314/ (last visited Oct. 14, 2025); 
see also  Morales v. Chadbourne , 996 F. Supp. 2d 19, 40 (D.R.I. 2014) (“ICE detainers are not 
mandatory. Federal regulations clearly label ICE detainers as ‘requests.’”); Galarza v. Szalczyk , 745 
F.3d 634 (3d Cir. 2014) (reaching the same conclusion). 
13 Local Law No. 59 (2014) of City of New York (codified at Admin . Code § 14-154). Local Law 59 also 
expanded the definition of “Civil Immigration Detainer” to encompass not only formal detainers issued 
pursuant to 8 C.F.R. § 287.7 but also “any similar federal request for detention of a person suspected 
of violating civil immigration law.”  Id. § 1. 
14 Admin. Code § 14-154(f). 
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 9  
 
The City Council enacted two more laws governing cooperation with civil 
immigration enforcement in 2017 that apply to all City agencies and employees, 
including the NYPD . First, Local Law 228 of 2017, codified at New York City 
Administrative Code §  10-178, provides both that “[n]o agency shall subject its 
officers or employees to the direction and supervision of the secretary of homeland 
security primarily in furtherance of immigration enforcement”
15 and that “[n]o city 
resources, including, but not limited to, time spent by employees, officers, contractors, 
or subcontractors while on duty, or the use of city property, shall be utilized for 
immigration enforcement.”
16 Whenever a City officer receives a request to provide 
support for immigration enforcement, the officer must make a record of that request, 
and any actions taken in response, and those requests must be summarized in a 
quarterly report to the City Council.
17 Local Law 228 of 2017 does not otherwise limit 
the NYPD’s authority to honor civil immigration detainers for individuals convicted 
of a serious crime, when accompanied by a judicial warrant, as permitted by New 
York City Administrative Code §  14-154, nor does it  limit the NYPD’s participation 
in task forces that are not primarily intended for immigration enforcement.
18 
 
Second, Local Law 246 of 2017, codified at New York City Administrative Code 
§ 4-210, prohibits non -local government personnel empowered to enforce civil or 
criminal laws from having access to non -public areas of City property unless one of 
six conditions are met: (1) access is authorized pursuant to an agreement; (2) the 
personnel have a judicial warrant; (3) access is required by law; (4) the personnel are 
accessing the property as part of a cooperative agreement; (5) access furthers the 
purpose of a C ity agency; or (6) exigent circumstances exist. Every agency with 
jurisdiction over City property is required to adopt guidelines or rules implementing 
Local Law 246. 
 
III. City Council Referral dated June 9, 2025 
 
On June 9, 2025, City Council Speaker Adrienne Adams and Chair of the 
Oversight and Investigations Committee Gale Brewer sent a letter to DOI 
Commissioner Jocelyn Strauber requesting that DOI “in itiate an investigation into 
the New York City Police Department’s . . . information-sharing practices and other 
                                                        
15 Guidance issued by the then -First Deputy Mayor on January 31, 2018,  makes clear that this 
language prohibits both formal and informal arrangements with the Department of Homeland 
Security. See Dean Fuleihan, Guidance for Agency Implementation of Local Law 228 of 2017 (“in 
relation to immigration enforcement”), OFFICE OF THE MAYOR (Jan. 31, 2018).  
16 Admin. Code § 10-178(b), (c). 
17 Id. § 10-178(d). The then -First Deputy Mayor’s guidance tasked MOIA with submitting that 
quarterly report to the City Council, with City agencies required to compile information for MOIA’s 
report on a quarterly basis. 
18 Id. § 10-178(e). 
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 10  
 
forms of collaboration with federal authorities in connection with civil immigration 
enforcement that may violate local laws.” 19 The letter expressed “concern[]” about 
“recent reports that information provided to federal agencies by the NYPD is now 
being used in civil immigration proceedings in ways that may violate New York City’s 
laws,”20 citing two such reports: 
 
• Yoav Gonen, et al., Arrested by the NYPD but Not Prosecuted, They’re Now 
Imprisoned in El Salvador, THE CITY (May 16, 2025)21 
 
The first article reports on the detention and deportation of 19-year-old 
Merwil Gutiérrez Flores. It reports that Mr. Gutiérrez Flores was 
arrested by the NYPD on February 24, 2025 and detained in the Bronx 
on firearm charges, but was never prosecuted. A DHS press release cited 
in the story states that Mr. Gutiérrez Flores was arrested during a joint 
operation between the FBI and the NYPD.
22 A DHS document cited in  
the story shows that, about 24 hours after Mr. Gutiérrez Flores’s arrest, 
the FBI turned him over to Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
(“ICE”) pursuant to a “Warrant for the Arrest of Alien.” 23 The story 
reports that Mr. Gutiérrez Flores, a Venezuelan na tional, was later 
deported to the Terrorism Confinement Center (“CECOT”) in El 
Salvador. 
 
When asked for comment on the story, the NYPD stated as follows: 
 
“In this matter, the NYPD, as part of an FBI task force, was solely 
engaged in a criminal investigat ion. The NYPD had no involvement in 
any civil immigration enforcement related to this case. 
 
The NYPD does not engage in civil immigration enforcement, period. As 
it has for many years, the NYPD works with local, state, and federal law 
enforcement agencies on criminal enforcement matters, including work 
                                                        
19 Adrienne Adams & Gail B rewer, Letter to Commissioner Strauber at 1 (June 9, 2025) ( hereinafter 
“Referral Letter”). 
20 Id. 
21 Available at https://www.thecity.nyc/2025/05/16/merwil-gutierrez-flores-nypd-fbi-ice-cecot-task-
forces/.  
22 See Dep’t of Homeland Security, DHS Releases Records of TdA Associate Deported to CECOT (May 
12, 2025), available at https://www.dhs.gov/news/2025/05/12/dhs-releases-records-tda-associate-
deported-cecot. 
23 See Dep’t of Homeland Security, Record of Deportable/Inadmissible Alien, available at 
https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/2025-05/25_0226_opa_i-213-final-draft-redacted_508.pdf 
(hereinafter “Gutiérrez Flores Form I-213”).  
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 11  
 
on federal criminal task forces. That work is critical to getting dangerous 
individuals out of our communities and keeping our families safe.” 
 
• Jake Offenhartz, NYPD Shared a Palestinian P rotester’s Info wit h ICE. 
Now I t’s Evidence in her D eportation Case, ASSOCIATED PRESS (May 2, 
2025)24 
 
The second article reports on the deportation proceedings of Leqaa 
Kordia. It reports that Ms. Kordia was detained by ICE during a 
voluntary check-in with immigration officials on March 13, 2025. The 
story further reports that, on March 14, 2025, the NYPD shared a four-
page report on Ms. Kordia with HSI, a division of ICE, reflecting that 
Ms. Kordia had been arrested at a protest outside Columbia University 
in the spring of 2 024. The story explains that this report was used by 
federal agents at an immigration hearing as evidence that Ms. Kordia 
should not be granted bail. 
 
When asked for comment on the story, the NYPD stated as follows: 
 
[The NYPD]  “received a request from a federal agency related to a 
criminal investigation and shared relevant information in accordance 
with our sanctuary city policies. 
 
The NYPD does not participate in programs that are designed for visa 
revocation or any civil immigration matter.” 
 
Based on these reports,25 the Speaker and Council Member Brewer “request[ed] that 
DOI conduct a comprehensive and independent review to determine whether the 
NYPD’s recent actions have violated City laws or circumvented their intent.”26 They 
further requested that the  investigation be “fully documented in a written report” 
and that, in the event DOI finds evidence of noncompliance or policy gaps, DOI should 
“recommend appropriate corrective actions, including policy revisions, specific 
                                                        
24 Available at https://apnews.com/article/nypd-ice-leqaa-kordia-trump-palestinian-protests-
90c6f446f431e8cec23a93172e1eb0b8. 
25 After the City Council sent its referral to DOI, The New York Times published an article describing 
another instance of potential non-compliance with laws concerning civil immigration enforcement. See 
William Rashbaum, et al., How Dr. Phil and a Top Adams Aide Helped Ease ICE’s Path Into New York, 
N.Y. TIMES (June 18, 2025) , https://www.nytimes.com/2025/06/18/nyregion/ice-kaz-adams-nyc-
immigration.html (di scussing alleged efforts by former NYPD official and current Deputy Mayor for 
Public Safety Kaz Daughtry to help federal officials plan a coordinated raid on immigrants living in 
two large City-funded hotels that was reportedly blocked by NYPD Commissioner Jessica Tisch , who 
concluded it violated the law). 
 
26 Referral Letter, supra note 19 at 2. 
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 12  
 
accountability measures, and improved oversight mechanisms that will prevent and 
deter future violations.”27 
 
IV. The NYPD’s Policies on Civil Immigration Enforcement 
 
The NYPD has had policies implementing the City’s restrictions on 
participation in civil immigration enforcement since at leas t 2019. Since January 
2025, the NYPD has adopted several additional policies designed to ensure that the 
NYPD’s operational resources are not deployed in furtherance of federal civil 
immigration enforcement efforts. In order to fully describe the NYPD’s cu rrent 
practices, this report will review the agency’s policies as they have evolved in recent 
years: (1) first, the written policies that were in place prior to 2025; and (2) second, 
the written policies that the NYPD has implemented since 2025 began. 
 
A. The NYPD’s Written Policies from 2019 to 2025 
 
Prior to 2025, the NYPD had two policies in place to ensure compliance with 
City laws related to immigration enforcement —Patrol Guide 212 -66 (effective June 
13, 2019) and Patrol Guide 212-126 (effective June 24, 2020, amended July 9, 2025). 
 
1. Patrol Guide 212-66 
 
Patrol Guide 212 -66 states that NYPD services should be provided to all 
individuals regardless of immigration status and that, as a general matter, members 
of the service should not inquire into individual s’ immigration status. Patrol Guide 
212-66 then sets out the specific circumstances in which it is permissible to collect, 
inquire about, or disclose an individuals’ immigration status: 
 
                                                        
27 Id. 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 13  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Members of the service are directed to consult with the NYPD’s Legal Bureau should 
they have questions related to the disclosure of identifying information. Patrol Guide 
212-66 is attached to this report as Appendix A. 
 
Collection 
 
Members of the NYPD can collect information about an individual’s immigration 
status only: 
 
• In connection with the investigation of a crime, or credible information 
about an attempted or impending crime; 
• In connection with an investigation by a City agency concerning the 
welfare of a minor or incompetent individual; 
• If pre-approved by the Agency Privacy Officer assigned to the Legal 
Bureau as a routine use; 
• If pre-approved by the City Chief Privacy Officer as in the best interests of 
the City; 
• If approved in writing by the Legal Bureau as required by law or treaty; or  
• If approved in writing by the Legal Bureau as in furtherance of the 
purpose or mission of the NYPD. 
 
 
Inquiry 
Members of the NYPD can inquire into an individual’s immigration status only if: 
• The inquiry is to investigate criminal activity; or 
• One of the exceptions for “Collection” applies; and 
• One of the two following conditions is met: 
o The individual’s immigration status is necessary for determining 
program, service or benefit eligibility, or for the provision of City 
services; or 
o The member of the service is required by law to inquire about the 
individual’s immigration status. 
 
Disclosure 
Members of the NYPD can disclose information about an individual’s immigration 
status only if disclosure: 
• Meets one of the exceptions for “Collection”; or 
• Is approved in writing by the Agency Privacy Officer assigned to the Legal 
Bureau and authorized in writing by the individual or their legal guardian.  
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 14  
 
2. Patrol Guide 212-126 
 
Patrol Guide 212-126 sets a default rule that members of the NYPD may not 
use City resources to support or assist in immigration enforcement, except under 
certain circumstances. It also prescribes the following procedure for notifying the 
NYPD chain of command and receiving instructions when a member of the service 
receives a re quest from a non -local law enforcement agency to support or assist in 
immigration enforcement: 
 
                          
 
                                          
 
                              
 
Patrol Guide 212 -126 provides an exception to this  protocol in emergency 
situations; in such cases, the highest -ranking uniformed member of the NYPD 
present at the scene must decide how to respond to the request and report back to the 
Operations Unit as soon as possible thereafter.  
 
Member of the Service 
• Notify desk officer, command of 
occurrence. 
• Provide details of request or 
proposal, including the agency 
requesting assistance, the type of 
assistance, and the reason for the 
request. 
Desk Officer 
• Notify the Operations Unit. 
• Provide details of the 
request or proposal. 
• Make a command log entry 
with pertinent details. 
Operations Unit 
• Notify the duty chief. 
• Provide details of the 
request or proposal. 
 
Duty Chief 
• Confer with the Legal Bureau 
regarding the request or proposal. 
• Determine the action to be taken, 
considering the grounds for the 
request and the need to ensure 
public safety. 
• Notify the Operations Unit of the 
action taken. 
Operations Unit 
• Notify the desk officer of the 
action taken or to be taken. 
• Record notifications and actions 
in a database, to be accessible 
for statistical analysis. 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 15  
 
Until July 2025, Patrol Guide 212-126 also stated:  
 
Members of the service are not required to follow [the procedures in Patrol 
Guide 212-126] when performing duties with non-local law enforcement 
agencies in connection with a cooperative agreement, such as a task force 
that is not primarily intended to further immigration enforcement, or 
when responding to requests from the Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) for detention of a person in custody beyond the time s/he would 
be released under state or local law or for advance notice of such person’s 
release. 
 
By its terms, this carveout appeared to create major exceptions to NYPD 
policies on compliance with local laws limiting participation in immigration 
enforcement.   
  
First, the language created an exception when members of  the service were 
“performing duties with non -local law enforcement agencies in connection with a 
cooperative agreement, such as a task force that is not primarily intended to further 
immigration enforcement . . . .” This language appears to create a blanket exemption 
from compliance with the rules set forth in Patrol Guide 212-126 as long as an NYPD 
officer was part of a “task force that is not primarily intended to further immigration 
enforcement.” Second, the language appeared to create an exception for officers 
“responding to requests from the Department of Homeland Security . . . for detention 
of a person in custody beyond the time s/he would be released under state or local law 
or for advance notice of such person’s release.” This, too, could have been interpreted 
to broadly exempt detainer requests from NYPD reporting protocol (rather than 
directing that those requests be processed through a separate reporting protocol, as 
was the NYPD’s practice). 
 
In connection with this investigation, on June 23, 20 25, DOI met with 
representatives of the NYPD’s Legal Bureau, which included a discussion of these 
apparent exceptions in Patrol Guide 212 -126. The NYPD acknowledged that the 
language was unclear and stated the procedure should be revised; however, it 
clarified to DOI that the language in question meant that the specific procedures set 
out in Patrol Guide 212 -126 did not apply in these situations, not that officers were 
permitted to cooperate in civil immigration enforcement in those situations. On July 
9, 2 025, following its meeting with DOI, the NYPD issued an updated version of 
Patrol Guide 212 -126 removing this carveout language.
28 The current version of 
Patrol Guide 212-126 is attached to this report as Appendix B.  
 
                                                        
28 DOI supports the rescission of this language, which could have been read in a manner contrary to 
local law and, at a minimum, had the potential to create confusion among NYPD personnel . 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 16  
 
B. The NYPD’s Written Policies Since 2025 
 
The NYPD has adopted three new policies related to civil immigration 
enforcement since the beginning of 2025— Operations Order No. 4 (effective January 
18, 2025); Chief of Detectives Memo, External Requests for Information from Federal 
Law Enforcement (th e “Chief of Detectives Memo”) (effective July 7, 2025); and 
Deputy Commissioner Intelligence and Terrorism Memo, External Requests for 
Information from Federal Law Enforcement Agencies  (the “Deputy Commissioner 
Memo”) (effective July 7, 2025). 
 
1. Operations Order No. 4 
 
The NYPD’s most recent comprehensive policy on civil immigration 
enforcement is Operations Order No. 4, which went into effect on January 18, 2025. 
It begins with a general prohibition on members of the NYPD assisting in any manner 
with civil immigration enforcement, then provides guidance on how members of the 
NYPD should respond to different scenarios that they may encounter. Among other 
examples, Operations Order No. 4 explains: 
 
• Members of the NYPD may not take any action that will interfer e 
with or impede civil immigration enforcement undertaken by federal 
authorities. 
• If individuals are obstructing immigration authorities, members of 
the NYPD are not to assist the authorities unless the individuals are 
engaged in conduct that, separate from obstructing civil immigration 
enforcement, poses an immediate threat to public safety. Otherwise, 
federal authorities alone will take enforcement action consistent 
with their own rules and procedures. 
• If immigration authorities are under physical attack, members of the 
NYPD will act to protect them. 
• If a member of the NYPD encounters federal authorities engaged in 
civil immigration enforcement, they must follow the procedure set 
forth in Patrol Guide 212-126. The member of the NYPD must refrain 
from acting until an order is given by an executive of the NYPD, after 
consultation with the Legal Bureau. 
• If immigration authorities present a member of the NYPD with 
papers to take an individual from NYPD custody, the member must 
contact the Operations Division, which will notify the Legal Bureau. 
No individual can be released from NYPD custody to immigration 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 17  
 
authorities without authorization from both an executive in the 
member’s operational command and a Legal Bureau executive.29 
• The Operations Division must monitor internal NYPD databases for 
entries of police responses related to immigration enforcement. If 
they encounter such an entry, they must immediately notify a 
commanding officer or duty captain, a Patrol Borough executive, and 
the Legal Bureau. 
 
The NYPD’s Legal Bureau stated that Operations Order No. 4 is the controlling 
agency policy on compliance with City laws concerning civil immigration 
enforcement. When it was issued, the order was distributed to all members of the 
service, who were required to certify that they had read and understood it. As of June 
2025, 42% of the NYPD had done so. The NYPD reported that, despite the 42% 
certification rate, “Operations Order [No.] 4 [is] in the 99th percentile of policies 
viewed by members of service since the Depa rtment began utilizing” 30 its current 
platform for distributing policy documents. DOI was also informed that the NYPD’s 
Deputy Commissioner of Legal Matters held trainings and answered questions on 
Operations Order No. 4 for borough commands, operational co mmands, and senior 
NYPD executives.  Operations Order No. 4 is attached to this report as Appendix C.  
 
2. Information Request Memos  
 
The information -sharing relationship between the NYPD and federal law 
enforcement agencies is complex. To successfully carry  out its public safety mission, 
the NYPD routinely collaborates with non -local law enforcement agencies to 
investigate criminal activity, including with federal law enforcement agencies that 
play a role in civil immigration enforcement. This collaboration requires information 
sharing, particularly where the NYPD has a unique level of access to information.  
 
The NYPD’s Legal Bureau has informed DOI that, to ensure compliance with 
local laws restricting the use of City resources to further civil immigration 
enforcement, while also permitting collaboration on criminal matters with federal 
partners, the NYPD distinguishes requests for information about known subjects of 
                                                        
29 The NYPD has informed DOI that, in practice, its policy differs. Instead, detainers are processed by 
the NYPD’s Criminal Justice Bureau, which manages the processing of prisoners. A detainer is 
honored only if the conditions set forth in New York City Administrative Code § 14-154 are met—that 
is, the subject of the detainer has been convicted of a violent or serious crime (defined by reference to 
an enumerated list of felonies from the New York Penal Law ) and has a judicial warrant for their 
arrest. Neither the Criminal Justice Bureau’s involvement,  nor the conditions set forth in the 
Administrative Code, are memorialized in a written NYPD policy.  The NYPD last honored a civil 
immigration detainer between October 1, 2015 to September 30, 2016,  and has denied over 13,000 
detainer requests since that time. 
30 NYPD Production Letter (July 25, 2025) (emphasis added). 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 18  
 
joint criminal investigations (“known subjects”) from individuals without a known 
connection to an investigation in which the NYPD is involved (“unknown subjects”). 
 
With respect to known subjects, the NYPD freely shares information with 
federal law enforcement partners working on joint criminal investigations. Because 
of the nature of joint task -force relationships, members of the NYPD know, or can 
easily confirm, that requests about known subjects relate to criminal matters. The 
NYPD’s Legal Bureau told DOI that the agency has communicated to its federal task-
force partners that its members are not permitted to work on civil immigration 
matters. The NYPD’s policy for the treatment of known subjects is not reflected in 
any of its written civil immigration enforcement policies. 
 
With respect to unknown subjects, up until recently, the NYPD also ope rated 
on practices that were not memorialized in a written policy. Prior to April 2025, the 
NYPD required federal law enforcement agencies seeking information about an 
unknown subject to fill out an “external agency request form” providing information 
about a criminal matter to which the request related, including the name and agency 
of the requestor, the name of the subject, the information requested, and the reason 
for the request. Those requests were directed through the NYPD’s Real Time Crime 
Center (“RTCC”),
31 which would grant requests based on a review of the information 
provided in the form alone. Between April and July 2025, the NYPD adopted an 
unwritten practice to direct those requests through the joint task forces associated 
with the requesting ag ency. Supervising Task Force Officers (“TFO”) would then  
determine whether to grant information requests following a dialogue with the 
requesting agency to determine whether the request was made in furtherance of a 
criminal investigation, as opposed to for  purposes of civil immigration enforcement. 
This practice was memorialized in the Chief of Detectives Memo and Deputy 
Commissioner Memo in July 2025.  
 
a. Chief of Detectives Memo 
 
On July 7, 2025, the NYPD adopted the Chief of Detectives Memo, a policy 
outlining the process that members of the NYPD assigned to a federal task force or 
the RTCC must follow when they receive a request implicating the City’s civil 
immigration enforcement laws.
32 
 
                                                        
31 New York City Police Dep ’t, Detectives, available at  
https://www.nyc.gov/site/nypd/bureaus/investigative/detectives.page (“Real Time Crime Center is a 
centralized, technology -driven support center which uses state -of-the-art technology, such as facial 
recognition and link -analysis software, to provide instant, vital information to detectives and other 
officers at the scene of a crime.”). 
32 Although issued on July 7, 2025, the NYPD informed DOI that “[t]he process described in the Chief 
of Detectives Memo has been in place within the Detective Bureau since on or about May 19, 2025.” 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 19  
 
 Under this policy, when a TFO is contacted by federal authorities regarding a 
request for information unrelated to an ongoing criminal investigation being 
conducted by the task force, the TFO must notify a supervising TFO. The supervisor 
must then confer with the agency and determine whether the request relates to an 
active criminal investigation. If it does, the supervising TFO must call the RTCC to 
request the information on behalf of the federal agency.  
 
The officer assigned to the RTCC is required to fill out an external agency 
request form documenting the inquiry and  notify an RTCC supervisor before 
providing the requested information to the supervising TFO, who forwards the 
information to the requesting agency. All requests from federal agencies made 
directly to the RTCC are re -directed to the relevant task forces to follow the same 
procedure. The Chief of Detectives Memo is attached to this report as Appendix D. 
 
b. Deputy Commissioner Memo 
 
 The NYPD also adopted the Deputy Commissioner Memo, an information -
sharing policy specific to the Intelligence and Counterterrori sm Bureau, on July 7, 
2025. When members of the Intelligence and Counterterrorism Bureau receive 
requests from federal agencies unrelated to a joint criminal or terrorism 
investigation, they are directed to notify their supervisor, who will confer with the  
relevant federal agency. If the supervisor determines that the request was made in 
connection with an active criminal or terrorism investigation, Bureau personnel must 
complete an external agency request form documenting the inquiry, which is retained 
in a centralized location by Bureau leadership. The results of the inquiry are then 
conveyed by the supervisor to the requesting agency. The Deputy Commissioner 
Memo is attached to this report as Appendix E. 
 
V. Discussion of Reported Incidents 
 
DOI reviewed two cases brought to its attention by the City Council in which 
public reporting called into question the NYPD’s compliance with local law—the cases 
of Merwil Gutiérrez Flores and Leqaa Kordia. In addition, DOI reviewed a third 
incident about which there was public reporting that NYPD officials collaborated 
with federal civil immigration authorities on a planned enforcement operation to take 
place at the Roosevelt and Row Hotels in Manhattan. Finally, DOI reviewed a fourth 
incident that DOI identified during the course of its investigation and a fifth incident 
that was disclosed to DOI by the NYPD. Although DOI concluded that the NYPD only 
clearly violated local law in the fourth incident (regarding an HSI Violent Gang Task 
Force member honoring a request for assistance with civil immigration enforcement), 
each of these case studies provide insight into where the NYPD’s policies are working, 
where they fall short, and how they can be improved. 
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 20  
 
A. Merwil Gutiérrez Flores 
 
The first incident reviewed by DOI involved Merwil Gutiérrez Flores’s transfer 
into federal custody following his arrest by the NYPD. With respect to this incident, 
DOI reviewed NYPD documentation concerning Mr. Gutiérrez Flores’s arrest, 
reviewed federal documentation concerning Mr. Gutiérrez Flores’ subsequent 
immigration proceedings, and interviewed the NYPD lieutenant who supervised the 
arrest. 
 
1. Factual Findings 
 
Mr. Gutiérrez Flores was arrested on February 24, 2025, at approximately 
11:30 PM as part of a joint operation undertaken by the Safe Streets Task Force 
VTI—a task force comprised of members of the NYPD and the FBI —and members of 
the Field Intelligence Officer team at the NYPD’s 52nd Precinct. The arresting 
officers brought Mr. Gutiérrez Flores back to the 52nd Precinct for interrogation and 
arrest processing. He was arrested for a violation of New York Penal Code § 265.03, 
the offense of criminal possession of a weapon in the second degree. Paperwork was 
sent to the Bronx District Attorney’s Office the morning of February 25. 
 
At approximately 7:00 PM on February 25, an NYPD officer received a 
facsimile from an ICE agent transmitting a civil immigration detainer request for 
Mr. Gutiérrez Flores with no judicial warrant attached.
33 The NYPD officer notified 
a platoon commander of this detainer request and further notified the Operations 
Unit at 9:17 PM. A decision was made not to honor ICE’s detainer around the same 
time. The arresting team at the 52nd Precinct was not made aware of this detainer 
request, according to the supervising officer of the arrest team. 
 
Around 10:00 PM on February 25, the Bronx District Attorney’s Office sent a 
document to the NYPD indicating that they were declining to prosecute Mr. Gutiérrez 
Flores, and advising that the NYPD check whether he was subject to outstanding 
arrest warrants before he was released. NYPD records reflect that agency personnel 
conducted a warrant check at approximately 10:03 PM with negative results.  
 
DOI interviewed the NYPD lieutenant, a member of the Safe Streets Task 
Force, who supervised the arrest of Mr. Gutiérrez Flores. The lieutenant stated that 
after the Bronx District Attorney declined to prosecute Mr. Gutiérrez Flores, he had 
a conversation with his task force counterpart at the FBI who indicated that the FBI 
would take Mr. Gutiérrez Flores into custody pending a charging decision by federal 
                                                        
33 Based on the NYPD’s records and an interview conducted by DOI of a supervising lieutenant present 
for Mr. Gutiérrez Flores’s arrest, this officer was not likely assigned to the 52nd Precinct. Rather, it 
appears that the detainer request was sent to Bronx Central Booking. 
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 21  
 
prosecutors with respect to Mr. Gutiérrez Flores. Mr. Gutiérrez Flores was then 
transferred from NYPD custody to FBI custody at approximately 10:06 PM. 
 
Records released by DHS indicate that the FBI then contacted ICE about Mr. 
Gutiérrez Flores and transferred Mr. Gutiérrez Flores into ICE custody at 
approximately 11:00 PM. ICE arrested him minutes later pursuant to a Warrant for 
Arrest of Alien.
34 At the time, Mr. Gutiérrez Flores had removal proceedings pending 
against him.35 DHS has since announced that Mr. Gutiérrez Flores was deported to 
El Salvador’s Terrorism Confinement Center on March 15, 2025.36  
 
2. Analysis of Incident 
 
At the time of the Gutiérrez Flores incident, the only NYPD policy directly 
addressing detainer requests from federal agents was Operations Order No. 4, which 
provides, in relevant part: 
 
Should federal civil immigration agents present a member of service 
with papers to take an individual from Department custody, the member 
of service will immediately contact the Operations Division and an 
executive in the member of service’s operational command. The 
Operations Division will notify the Legal Bureau. No individual is to be 
released from Department custody to civil immigration a uthorities 
without authorization from both an executive in the member of service’s 
operational command and a Legal Bureau executive. 
 
The NYPD officer who received an ICE detainer request by email followed this policy 
by notifying his precinct’s platoon commander and the Operations Unit. The NYPD 
determined that the detainer should not be honored, consistent with the restrictions 
imposed by Local Law 59 of 2014. 
 
 The decision to transfer Mr. Gutiérrez Flores to FBI custody was also 
consistent with NYPD policies and local law. As noted above, the NYPD transferred 
Mr. Gutiérrez Flores to FBI custody only after the Bronx District Attorney’s Office 
declined to prosecute him and only after an FBI agent informed an NYPD supervisor 
that the FBI would continue to d etain Mr. Gutiérrez Flores pending a decision by a 
federal prosecutor as to whether Mr. Gutiérrez Flores would be charged with a federal 
crime. Nothing in local law or NYPD policy prohibits the NYPD’s cooperation with 
federal officials enforcing criminal law. 
 
                                                        
34 Gutiérrez Flores Form I-213, supra note 23 at 3. 
35 Id. 
36 Dep’t of Homeland Security, supra note 22. 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 22  
 
Nevertheless, the FBI’s decision to transfer Mr. Gutiérrez Flores to ICE within 
an hour of his release from NYPD custody highlights an important consideration for 
the NYPD’s policies— even federal agencies not traditionally thought to enforce civil 
immigration laws, like the FBI, may assist in civil immigration enforcement. Most of 
the NYPD’s policies account for this possibility, broadly prohibiting assistance with 
civil immigration enforcement.
37 However, the NYPD’s policy on civil immigration 
detainer requests is drawn more narrowly, applying only to requests from “federal 
civil immigration agents.”38 To account for the fact that other federal agents may also 
be engaged in civil immigration enforcement (and to better implement the 
requirements of New York City Administrative Code §  14-154
39), the NYPD should 
scrutinize requests for custody transfers from any federal agents to ensure that they 
do not relate to civil immigration enforcement and to apply the standards required 
by law if they do. While additional scrutiny will not necessarily preclude an ultimate 
transfer into ICE custody—in Mr.  Gutiérrez Flores’s case, federal agents provided a 
criminal purpose for his detention and the federal government may consider criminal 
enforcement and subsequently opt  for immigration enforcement —such scrutiny 
would ensure that the NYPD has as much information as possible before transferring 
individuals into federal custody. This recommendation is set forth below as 
Recommendation #1. 
  
B. Leqaa Kordia 
 
The second incident reviewed by DOI involved the federal government’s use of 
NYPD arrest records during immigration proceedings brought against Leqaa Kordia. 
To conduct this review, DOI reviewed internal NYPD documents concerning Ms. 
Kordia as well as public documents concerning Ms. Kordia’s immigration proceedings 
and public statements made by the Police Commissioner regarding the incident.  
 
1. Factual Findings 
 
On March 14, 2025, the NYPD received a request from a Special Agent at HSI 
for “all NYPD arrest/incident report(s) and summons(es) for Leqaa KORDIA” via the 
RTCC. The request noted that HSI was conducting a money laundering investigation 
                                                        
37 See, e.g., Operations Order No. 4 ¶  11 (discussing requirements for when “a uniformed member of 
service encounters federal agents engaged in civil immigration enforcement”); Patrol Guide 212 -126 
(prohibiting assistance with civil immigration enforcement presented by any “non- local law 
enforcement agency”). 
38 Operations Order No. 4 ¶ 14. 
39 Local law expressly contemplates that civil immigration detainer requests can  come from agents 
other than ICE, defining “civil immigration detainer” as “a detainer issued pursuant to 8 CFR § 287.7 
or any similar federal request for detention of a person suspected of violating civil immigration law. ” 
Admin. Code § 14-154(a)(1) (emphasis added). 
 
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 23  
 
and cited a corresponding HSI case number for that investigation. In response, based 
solely on the information provided by HSI on its request form, at 3:44 PM, an NYPD 
officer generated a Domain Awareness System report which was provided to ICE and 
which contained information confirming that Ms. Kordia had been issued two 
summonses on April 30, 2024, for failing to comply with an NYPD co mmand to 
disperse during protest activity.  
 
The NYPD has since acknowledged that the summons information provided 
was associated with a sealed arrest, and it conducted an internal investigation to 
determine why that information was nevertheless provided to HSI.
40 The NYPD 
determined that, at the time that NYPD provided the report to ICE, the summonses 
were not sealed in NYPD databases because the Office of Court Administration had 
not notified the NYPD that they were subject to sealing. 
 
 At the time HSI se nt its request to the NYPD, ICE had already detained Ms. 
Kordia during a voluntary check-in with immigration officials in Newark, New Jersey 
on March 13.
41 DHS reported that ICE had arrested Ms. Kordia for overstaying her 
expired F -1 student visa. 42 In that press release, DHS noted that “in April 2024 
Kordia was arrested for her involvement in pro -Hamas protests at Columbia 
University in New York City.” 43 The federal government subsequently used 
information about Ms. Kordia’s summonses at an immigration hearing.44 Ms. Kordia 
has been detained at an ICE detention facility in Texas since March.45 
 
2. Analysis of Incident 
 
At the time of the Kordia incident, the NYPD did not have written policies 
designed to help officers determine whether a request from a federal agent was being 
                                                        
40 OFFICE OF THE MAYOR, Transcript: Mayor Adams Briefs Media on NYPD Officers Attacked in Times 
Square with NYPD Commissioner Tisch and Holds In -Person Media Availability  (May 6, 2025), 
available at  https://www.nyc.gov/mayors-office/news/2025/05/transcript-mayor-adams-briefs-media-
nypd-officers-attacked-times-square-nypd. 
 
41 Jake Offenhartz, NYPD Shared a P alestinian Protester’s Info with ICE. Now I t’s Evidence in her 
Deportation Case, ASSOCIATED PRESS (May 2, 2025), https://apnews.com/article/nypd-ice-leqaa-kordia-
trump-palestinian-protests-90c6f446f431e8cec23a93172e1eb0b8. 
 
42 Dep’t of Homeland Security, VIDEO: Columbia University Student Whose Visa Was Revoked for 
Supporting Hamas and Terrorist Activities Used CBP Home App to Self- Deport (Mar. 14, 2025), 
available at  https://www.dhs.gov/news/2025/03/14/video-columbia-university-student-whose-visa-
was-revoked-supporting-hamas-and.  
43 Id. 
44 Offenhartz, supra note 41 (“At an April 3rd hearing, the federal government pointed to Kordia’s prior 
arrest for protesting as a reason she should not be released.”). 
45 See generally Kordia v. Noem, No. 3:25-cv-01072 (N.D. Tex. Apr. 30, 2025) (docket of Ms. Kordia’s 
habeas case, not reflecting release from custody) (last accessed November 25, 2025).  
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 24  
 
made to further civil immigration enforcement purposes.46 Instead, the NYPD had a 
practice that required a requesting federal agent to submit a form to the RTCC to 
request information about a subject, if that subject was not known to the NYPD. I f 
that form indicated that the request was made in furtherance of a criminal 
investigation, the NYPD would disclose the requested information to the federal 
agent without further inquiry. That practice was followed in Ms. Kordia’s case—HSI 
filled out a for m requesting information about Ms. Kordia, providing an HSI case 
number and indicating that the request was in furtherance of a money laundering 
investigation. Because the NYPD conducted no further inquiry into HSI’s 
representation and DOI did not seek inf ormation directly from HSI as part of this 
investigation, DOI is not able to determine whether HSI had a bona fide money 
laundering investigation into Ms. Kordia. However, public records reflect that DHS 
had active immigration proceedings against Ms. Kordi a at the time of HSI’s 
information request. 
 
In April 2025, after the Kordia incident, the NYPD adopted a new policy for 
handling information requests from federal agents about individuals who were not 
subjects of an NYPD task force investigation. Since th at time, all information 
requests from federal agents are routed from the RTCC to TFOs on relevant joint 
task forces, who are required to engage in a dialogue with the relevant federal agency 
before honoring a request. The NYPD informed DOI that it chose t o channel these 
requests through task forces in order to take advantage of repeat player task force 
relationships and because TFOs are more attuned to the distinction between criminal 
enforcement and civil immigration enforcement. The NYPD has since formal ized 
aspects of these changes into the Chief of Detectives Memo and the Deputy 
Commissioner Memo. DOI supports the NYPD’s changes, which help ensure that the 
NYPD can most accurately assess whether a federal request is in furtherance of civil 
or criminal enforcement and thereby fully comply with the local law restrictions on 
the use of City resources for civil immigration enforcement purposes. 
 
As discussed in Recommendation #3 below, the NYPD should take steps to 
clarify and streamline the directions to of ficers for determining whether to honor a 
request for assistance from federal agencies. The NYPD processes these federal 
requests under a patchwork of policies reflected in Patrol Guide 212-126, Operations 
Order No. 4, the Chief of Detectives Memo, and the Deputy Commissioner Memo. In 
particular, the NYPD would benefit from consolidating the reforms reflected in the 
Chief of Detectives Memo and Deputy Commissioner Memo into a policy applicable 
to all NYPD members. Furthermore, NYPD officers currently receiv e little guidance 
or training on whether federal requests implicate civil immigration enforcement. 
Operations Order No. 4 lists four exemplary scenarios, but only 42% of NYPD officers 
have certified that they  have read that order. By providing additional e xamples 
                                                        
46 Both Patrol Guide 212- 126 and Operations Order No. 4 provide protocol for how to respond to 
requests for assistance with civil  immigration enforcement, but neither address the antecedent 
question of how to identify whether a request relates to civil immigration enforcement.  
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 25  
 
beyond those listed in Operations Order No. 4 and training officers on how to 
recognize when NYPD policies on civil immigration enforcement are implicated, the 
NYPD could strengthen existing procedures so as to mitigate the risk of disclosure of 
information to federal authorities to be used for immigration enforcement. 
 
C. Planned Operation at the Roosevelt and Row Hotels 
 
On June 18, 2025, The New York Times reported that former NYPD Deputy 
Commissioner of Operations (now Deputy Mayor of Public Safety ) Kaz Daughtry 
“helped [Thomas] Homan and other federal officials plan [a] coordinated raid[] 
targeting immigrants living in at least two large city -funded hotels.”47 It reported 
that those “raids were originally planned to target noncitizens who were wanted for 
arrest,” but that “Commissioner Tisch halted her department’s involvement once it 
became clear that hundreds of ICE agents would take part, seeking to detain anyone 
based solely on their immigration status.”
48 Given the story’s nexus to the City 
Council’s referral, DOI investigated the allegations contained in it and the results of 
that investigation are summarized below. DOI’s review included interviews with 
Chief of Detectives Joseph Kenny, the Deputy Mayor for Public Safety Kaz Daughtry, 
the NYPD In spector assigned to plan the arrest warrant operation, and an NYPD 
member of an HSI-NYPD task force consulted on the operation, as well as the review 
of information provided to DOI by the NYPD’s Legal Bureau. 
 
1. Factual Findings 
 
During the peak of New York City’s influx of asylum seekers in 2022 and 2023, 
New York City converted several hotels into migrant shelters to help house the City’s 
new residents, including Row NYC in late 2022 and the Roosevelt Hotel in May 
2023.
49 By the end of 2024, there were repor ts that some residents in those hotels 
were engaging in criminal activity.50  
 
                                                        
47 Rashbaum et al., supra note 25. 
48 Id. 
 
49 See, e.g., Bernadette Hogan, et al., NYC Moving Migrants into Famed Luxury Times Square Hotel , 
N.Y. POST (Aug. 15, 2022), available at https://nypost.com/2022/08/15/row-nyc-hotel-being-turned-into-
migrant-shelter/; OFFICE OF THE MAYOR, Mayor Adams Announces Launch of Asylum Seeker Arrival 
Center, Ninth Humanitarian Emergency Response and Relief Center to Continue to Respond to Asylum 
Seeker Influx  (May 13, 2023), https://www.nyc.gov/office-of-th e-mayor/news/333-23/mayor-adams-
launch-asylum-seeker-arrival-center-ninth-humanitarian-emergency-response.  
50 See, e.g., Michael Ruiz, Juvenile Illegal Immigrant Gang Members Behind Robbery Spree Stay Out 
of Jail Due to Age, FOX NEWS (Oct. 15, 2024), https://www.foxnews.com/us/juvenile-illegal-immigrant-
gang-members-behind-robbery-spree-stay-out-jail-due-age; Ma x  Rivera & Jorge Fitz -Gibbon, NYC 
Migrant Moms Are Fed Up with G ang Violence at N otorious Midtown H otel as  T hey Worry About 
Impact on Their Kids, N.Y. POST (Oct. 17, 2024), https://nypost.com/2024/10/17/us-n ews/nyc-migrant-
hotels-violent-gang-rep-is-all-over-tiktok-say-fed-up-residents-who-worry-its-only-gonna-get-worse/.  
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 26  
 
In early 2025, the NYPD began planning an operation to target that criminal 
activity. More specifically, in late February or early March, the Chief of Detectives 
met with an NYPD Inspector and an NYPD member of an NYPD/HSI joint task force 
to begin planning an operation with a two -fold purpose—to arrest targets of a joint 
NYPD/HSI gun-trafficking investigation at the Row and to execute outstanding state 
criminal warrants for indiv iduals thought to reside in the Row and other City -run 
migrant shelters, including the Roosevelt. The NYPD anticipated that this arrest 
operation would take place during the week of March 10. It would involve only the 
NYPD and the execution of arrest warrants issued for state criminal offenses, apart 
from one anticipated NYPD/HSI task force gun -trafficking arrest that would occur 
outside the Row and would also involve HSI agents. 
 
On March 5, 2025, Secretary of Homeland Security Kristi Noem visited New 
York City and held an event for area law enforcement officials on a Coast Guard boat, 
which the Chief of Detectives attended. At that event, the Chief of Detectives was 
approached by an ICE
51 executive who informed him that ICE intended to send 
hundreds of agents to New York for the NYPD’s operation. This statement came as a 
surprise to the Chief of Detectives, as he was not aware that ICE intended to 
participate in the operation.
52 The Chief of Detectives informed the ICE official that 
ICE could not participate in the NYPD’s planned operation. He did not inform the 
NYPD Deputy Commissioner of Legal Matters of this ICE executive’s remarks and 
could not recall whether he discussed them with the Police Commissioner prior to 
phone calls he had with her on Friday, March 7, discussed below.
53 The Chief of 
Detectives left for a scheduled vacation the evening of March 5. 
 
The NYPD Inspector charged with planning the Row and Roosevelt operation 
had a similar experience with federal officials on Thursday, March 6. That day, HSI’s 
Assistant Special Agent-in-Charge (“ASAC”) of the New York field office requested a 
call with the Inspector to clarify whether the operation was moving forward. The 
ASAC informed the Inspector that HSI intended to send hundreds of officers to the 
NYPD’s operation to conduct a sweep of warrants for illegal entry and re -entry 
                                                        
51 ICE is divided into several bureaus, including HSI (which conducts criminal investigations) and 
Enforcement and Removal Operations (“ERO”) (which conducts civil enforcement). Members of the 
NYPD generally use the term HSI to refer to ICE’s criminal enforcement arm, but use the term ICE 
to refer to the civil enforcement conducted by ERO.  
52 It is unclear how ICE became aware of the NYPD’s planned operation . DOI did not interview  any 
federal agents in connection with this investigation, including the HSI agents who were part of the 
task force involved in NYPD’s plans for the Roosevelt and Row Hotel operations. Deputy Mayor 
Daughtry stated that he did not inform ICE of the operations. 
53 During his interview with DOI, Deputy Mayor Daughtry stated that the Chief of Detectives informed 
him of this interaction and that he told the Chief of Detectives that ICE’s presence was not necessary 
and that the Police Commissioner should be inform ed. The Deputy Mayor’s account was not 
corroborated by the Chief of Detectives ’ account—the Chief of Detectives did not report that he had a 
conversation with the Deputy Mayor after the Coast Guard event. 
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 27  
 
(conduct that the NYPD is prohibited from assisting in under local law). The 
Inspector informed the ASAC that such a large HSI presence was unnecessary and 
immediately reported his interaction to his immediate supervisor, the NYPD’s Chief 
of Citywide Investigations. The NYPD task force officer who assisted in planning the 
Row and the Roosevelt operation also informed DOI that, when he learned of HSI’s 
intention to conduct a sweep for illegal entry and re-entry warrants, he reported this 
fact to the NYPD’s Chief of Citywide Investigations. 
 
On Friday, March 7, the Chief of Citywide Investigations briefed an advisor to 
the Police Commissioner regarding the contemplated operation, who s ubsequently 
briefed the Police Commissioner. The Police Commissioner expressed operational 
concerns about the plan and called the Chief of Detectives to gain clarity on 
operational details. During that call, the Chief of Detectives informed the Police 
Commissioner that ICE was also planning an operation at the Roosevelt and the Row 
for the same day. The Police Commissioner and the Deputy Commissioner of Legal 
Matters called the Special Agent in Charge (SAC) of HSI’s New York Field Office and 
the SAC informed the Commissioner that ICE’s operation would involve the execution 
of criminal warrants for illegal entry and re -entry offenses. The Commissioner 
informed the SAC that the NYPD could not participate in such an operation due to 
local laws restricting the N YPD’s participation in civil immigration enforcement as 
well as enforcement of criminal laws concerning illegal entry and re-entry. Soon after, 
the Commissioner directed the NYPD’s operation not to move forward. 
 
2. Analysis of Incident 
 
NYPD executives —in pa rticular, the Chief of Detectives and the Police 
Commissioner—complied with local law by putting a stop to potential ICE 
involvement with an NYPD operation that could have resulted in the NYPD assisting 
federal officials with civil immigration enforcement.  The NYPD officers responsible 
for planning the operation also complied with local law by informing their supervisors 
of federal agents’ intention to engage in activities that the NYPD could not assist with 
during the operation. 
 
While the Chief of Detectives and Police Commissioner ultimately avoided the 
commitment of City resources toward immigration enforcement, this incident 
highlights a need for more training on when NYPD members should elevate requests 
for assistance with immigration enforcement, as discussed below in Recommendation 
#4. A common thread throughout Patrol Guide 212 -126 and Operations Order No. 4 
is that, when faced with a situation implicating the NYPD’s participation in civil 
immigration enforcement, members of the service should consul t with the Legal 
Bureau.
54 The scenario faced by the Chief of Detectives —having been informed of 
ICE’s plan to send hundreds of officers to New York to participate in an NYPD 
                                                        
54 See, e.g., Patrol Guide 212-126 ¶ 8; Operations Order No. 4 ¶¶ 11-14. 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 28  
 
operation—does not fit comfortably within the language of any one of those policy 
provisions. However, the spirit of the NYPD’s policies is that the Legal Bureau should 
be consulted on matters pertaining to civil immigration enforcement. Here, it appears 
that the Chief of Detectives did not inform the Legal Bureau or the Police 
Commissioner of ICE’s planned involvement in the operation until prompted by a 
phone call with the Commissioner on March 7. To be clear, the Chief of Detectives 
never committed City resources toward immigration enforcement; in fact, he 
informed ICE that the NYPD w ould not do so. Nevertheless, the Chief of Detectives 
should have proactively raised ICE’s potential involvement in the NYPD’s operation 
with the Legal Bureau.  
  
D. Task Force Request 
 
DOI independently received information concerning an additional incident 
involving a federal task force that included members of the NYPD and the 
Department of Correction that implicated the City’s immigration enforcement laws. 
DOI’s review of this incident included the review of several key NYPD email 
communications as well as  the NYPD Legal Bureau’s summary of information 
learned during its Internal Affairs Bureau’s (IAB’s) investigation  of this incident, 
which was prompted by the information that DOI provided to the NYPD. 
 
1. Factual Findings 
 
On November 21, 2024, an NYPD member of an HSI Violent Gang Task Force 
received an email from his counterparts at HSI asking him to “put out alerts” on a 
list of individuals provided by HSI. Internal HSI emails visible to the NYPD officer 
from earlier in that email chain stated that those i ndividuals were “suspected Tren 
de Aragua (TdA) members” who “may be amenable to custody redetermination, 
administrative arrest, or placed on an elevated [alternative to detention]”—all actions 
that would constitute civil immigration enforcement under New York City law.  The 
emails also explicitly referenced ERO, ICE’s civil immigration enforcement arm. At 
the time the NYPD officer received this email, NYPD policy (Patrol Guide 212 -126) 
required that he report this request to his desk officer. 
 
 DOI brought  this email to the NYPD’s attention in connection with this 
investigation. The NYPD was not previously aware of the communication and 
referred the matter to its IAB for an internal investigation. The NYPD informed DOI 
that the IAB has since concluded that the officer did comply with HSI’s request; he 
placed alerts on individuals within an NYPD database who were the subject of civil 
immigration enforcement efforts so that he and three other NYPD task force 
members would receive automated updates if any of the individuals flagged had a law 
enforcement interaction.
55 However, the IAB has uncovered no evidence that NYPD 
                                                        
55 The IAB uncovered no evidence that the other three NYPD task force members took steps to assist 
in civil immigration enforcement. 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 29  
 
officers took any actions as a result of these automated alerts. As a result of the IAB 
investigation, the NYPD removed the officer from the HSI Violent Gang Task For ce 
and restricted his access to the computer systems from which those alerts are made. 
The IAB’s investigation remains ongoing as of the date of this report. 
 
2. Analysis of Incident 
 
Compliance with a request for assistance with civil immigration enforcement  
efforts violates local law and NYPD policy. As such, since DOI brought this matter to 
the NYPD’s attention, the NYPD has acted appropriately by promptly investigating 
it to determine what disciplinary measures are warranted and taking interim steps 
to restrict access to NYPD systems.  
 
This incident underscores the importance of providing additional training to 
NYPD members of service, particularly those serving in federal task forces, on 
compliance with local law in this area, as set forth in Recommendati on #4. When 
interviewed by the IAB, the NYPD officer explained, in sum and substance, that he 
believed that his actions were taken in connection with a criminal law enforcement 
operation. Assuming the officer’s statements were truthful, the officer missed clear 
signs—the discussion of ERO and of civil immigration enforcement actions —that 
should have made it apparent to him that he was being asked to assist with civil 
immigration enforcement.  
 
Taking a broader view, this incident highlights that the NYPD ma y not be 
aware of each instance in which an officer is asked to assist with civil immigration 
enforcement and fails to follow the NYPD’s policies.  If an incident goes unreported, 
it is unlikely to be brought to leadership’s attention. As recommended below  in 
Recommendation #6, to gain a more complete understanding of compliance with local 
law, the NYPD should conduct a limited email audit of NYPD officers assigned to 
federal task forces to determine whether there are any other reportable instances 
and, depending on the nature and volume of such instances, whether they warrant 
strengthening of the NYPD’s policies or the imposition of other procedures, such as 
regular future audits. 
 
E. Federal Fugitive Incident 
 
During DOI’s investigation, the NYPD disclosed an  additional event 
implicating the NYPD’s policies for processing immigration -related requests from 
federal agents that has not been previously reported. DOI reviewed documents and 
body-worn camera footage of the NYPD officers involved in this incident.  
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 30  
 
1. Factual Findings 
 
On June 18, 2025 at 8:56 PM, two federal agents flagged down two NYPD 
officers on patrol at the corner of Orchard Street and East Houston Street in 
Manhattan. The federal agents identified themselves as FBI and DHS agents. When 
notified that one agent worked for DHS, one NYPD officer stated: “Okay, let me just 
get my boss over here.”  
 
The federal agents explained that they had been transporting a detainee from 
John F. Kennedy Airport across the Williamsburg Bridge when the detainee jumped 
from the back of one of their cars. The federal agents chased the escapee down on foot 
and apprehended him, but got lost along the way and flagged down the NYPD for 
assistance. The agents further explained that the subject had been detained pursuant 
to a f inal deportation order and asked whether the NYPD would temporarily take 
custody of him while they retrieved their vehicles. An NYPD officer responded to the 
federal agents: “Give us a second, I’m getting off with my boss over here, because I’m 
not sure our – our guidelines –, I’m not sure if we’re able to.” 
 
Shortly thereafter, several additional officers arrived at the scene, including 
an NYPD lieutenant. After being briefed, the lieutenant told the federal agents that 
the NYPD would briefly take custody of the detainee while the responding officers 
drove the federal agents to pick up their vehicles. While the subject was detained, the 
lieutenant placed a call to “Central” (the NYPD radio dispatcher) and informed the 
dispatcher that the FBI had made an arrest at his present location and asked the 
NYPD to hold the arrestee. He did not mention the presence of DHS or the final 
deportation order. Records from the NYPD’s Intergraph Computer Aided Dispatch 
(ICAD) system registered this call at 9:09 PM, with no no tation of the event’s 
immigration nexus. Around 9:15 PM, other supervisors and the Operations Unit were 
also notified. Soon after, the federal agents arrived back at the scene and took the 
detainee back into federal custody. 
 
 Two additional reports were generated after the incident. First, the Operations 
Unit sent an email to senior NYPD leadership, including the Police Commissioner, at 
10:29 PM noting that “FBI Agents were transporting an ICE detainee over the 
Williamsburg Bridge” when the detainee fled. The email further notes that after 
federal agents re -detained the escapee, they flagged down NYPD officers to 
temporarily secure their detainee and to bring them back to their vehicles. The email 
also states that the captain of the relevant precinct was notified. 
 
 Second, the 7th Precinct Patrol Supervisor sent a memorandum to the Chief of 
Patrol dated June 18, 2025. The memo reflects that officers “were approached by an 
FBI agent requesting assistance.” It then states that two federal agents “who 
identified themselves as FBI agents” asked that the officers assist them in securing 
an escaped prisoner and procuring their abandoned vehicles. It notes that the officers 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 31  
 
requested the presence of a patrol supervisor, who arrived before assistance was 
provided. Finally, the memo notes the officers who were on the scene and those who 
were notified, including the Operations Unit; the precinct commanding officer, 
executive officer, and desk officer; and the Patrol Services Bureau. This memo does 
not disclose that the incident had a nexus to civil immigration enforcement. 
 
2. Analysis of Incident 
 
 Officers complied with the NYPD’s policies and local law during the federal 
fugitive incident. When he believed he had received a request related to civil 
immigration enforcement, one of the officers who was initially flagged down properly 
elevated the request to his supervisor before acting further. That officer clearly 
highlighted that the federal agents’ request implicated the NYPD’s rules on civil 
immigration enforcement and communicated that fact to other NYPD personnel.  
 
When the officer’s supervisor, a lieutenant, arrived at the scene, he decided to 
assist in securing the escaped detainee due to the exigent circumstances. This 
decision was permissible under NYPD policy; P atrol Guide 212 -126 permits “[i]n 
emergency, public safety related situations” for “the decision to support [a] non-local 
law enforcement agency” to “be made by the highest ranking uniformed member of 
the service at the scene.” This decision was also a fai r implementation of the City’s 
laws. While NYPD policy explicitly prohibits NYPD members from “[d]etaining an 
individual so that federal civil immigration agents can take that person into 
custody,”
56 even absent the civil -immigration nexus, the NYPD could have 
appropriately detained the fugitive for violating federal law, which criminalizes 
escapes from federal custody.57 
 
 The lieutenant also promptly reported his decision up the chain of command, 
as is required by Patrol Guide 212-126 and Operations Order No. 4. However, during 
his call to the NYPD radio dispatcher, the lieutenant failed to disclose that the federal 
request for assistance had an immigration nexus —namely that an agent from DHS 
had asked for assistance detaining someone pursuant to a final dep ortation order. 
The lieutenant’s failure to disclose this nexus was arguably inconsistent with Patrol 
Guide 212-126, which required him to “immediately notify the Operations Unit of 
[his] decision and include details of the circumstances.” It bears noting, however, that 
                                                        
56 Operations Order No. 4 ¶ 6(b). 
57 Specifically, 18 U.S.C. §  751(a) states: “Whoever escapes or attempts to escape from the custody of 
the Attorney General . . . shall , . . . if the custody . . . is for . . . expulsion proceedings under the 
immigration laws, . . . be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.” It is 
DOI’s understanding that assisting in preventing a violation of 18 U.S.C. §  751(a) falls outside the 
City’s restrictions on assistance with “immigration enforcement” because that term is defined to 
include enforcement of criminal laws in the Immigration and Nationality Act only if they “penalize[] a 
person’s presence in, entry into, or reentry into the United States.” Admin. Code § 10-178(a). Section 
751(a) is not part of the Immigration and Nationality Act and it does not “penalize[] a person’s presence 
in, entry into, or reentry into the United States.” 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 32  
 
the Operations Unit did ultimately receive notice of the event’s immigration nexus 
and flagged it in an email to NYPD executives.  
 
This incident demonstrates that NYPD officers may benefit from more training 
on when and how to escalate requ ests for assistance with civil immigration 
enforcement, as recommended in Recommendations #3 and #4. The responding 
lieutenant did not disclose the presence of a DHS agent or of a final deportation order 
in his call to other NYPD bureaus. As a result, seve ral of the reports ultimately 
circulated by the NYPD did not mention that the federal agents’ request of the NYPD 
included an immigration enforcement aspect.
58 For NYPD officials to comply with 
City law and NYPD policy, they must be made aware of any incide nt or assistance 
that has a civil immigration nexus — the absence of this information could jeopardize 
the NYPD’s ability to act appropriately. That risk may be mitigated by giving officers 
training sufficient to ensure, to the extent possible, that the NYPD is made aware at 
all stages of the reporting chain of matters involving civil immigration. 
 
VI. Compliance with Other Local Law Requirements 
 
In addition to restricting City employees and officers from assisting in civil 
immigration enforcement, local law imposes policy -adoption, recordkeeping, and 
reporting requirements on City agencies to ensure orderly and transparent 
implementation of the laws’ substantive requirements. As part of this investigation, 
DOI has assessed the NYPD’s compliance with those prov isions of Local Law 59 of 
2014, Local Law 228 of 2017, and Local Law 246 of 2017. As discussed in more detail 
below, the NYPD complies with Local Law 59, but complies with Local Law 228 and 
Local Law 246 only in part. 
 
A. Local Law 59 of 2014: NYPD Annual Report on Civil Immigration Detainer Requests 
 
 Local Law 59 requires that, by September 1 of every year, the NYPD post an 
annual report on its website summarizing information about the civil immigration 
detainer requests it received in the prior year. 59 That report must include: (1) the 
number of detainer requests received; (2) the number of individuals held in custody 
pursuant to such detainer requests beyond the time when the individuals would 
otherwise be released from custody; (3) the number of individuals  transferred 
pursuant to such detainer requests; (4) the number of detainer requests that were 
not honored; and (5) the number of requests made by federal authorities about 
                                                        
58 To their credit, other units, like the Operations Unit, conveyed the immigration nexus to NYPD 
leadership. 
 
59 Admin. Code § 14-154(f). 
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 33  
 
individuals’ incarceration status, release dates, court appearance dates, or other 
information, disaggregated along several metrics.60 
 
 The NYPD publishes the Local Law 59 report on its website.61 The NYPD has 
published a report including the appropriate information for every year since Local 
Law 59 went into effect. According to those reports, the NYPD has not honored a civil 
immigration detainer since the reporting period ending in September 2016, but it 
provided information (such as incarceration status, release dates, etc.) to federal 
immigration authorities about individuals who had b een convicted of violent or 
serious crimes on twenty-six occasions between 2017 and 2021. Having reviewed the 
NYPD’s reports, DOI determined that the NYPD complies with Local Law 59. 
 
B. Local Law 228 of 2017: City-wide Agency Reports on Requests for Assistance with Civil 
Immigration Enforcement 
 
 Local Law 228, which restricts the use of City resources to assist with civil 
immigration enforcement, also includes recordkeeping and reporting requirements: 
 
Whenever any city officer or employee receives a request  from a non -
local law enforcement agency for the city to provide support or 
assistance intended to further immigration enforcement, such officer or 
employee's agency shall make a record relating to such request, 
including any response or actions taken in response. 
 
An office of the mayor, or an agency the head of which is appointed by 
the mayor, shall be designated by the mayor to submit to the speaker of 
the council a quarterly report containing an anonymized compilation or 
summary of such requests and actions taken in response, disaggregated 
by the requesting non- local law enforcement agency and the agency 
receiving such a request; provided, however, disclosure of any such 
information shall not be required if: (i) such disclosure would interfere 
with law enforcement investigations or (ii) such disclosure is related to 
actions taken pursuant to clause (i) of subdivision e of this section and 
would compromise public safety. Such report shall not be required to 
include information contained in reports required pursuant to section 9-
131, 9-205, or 14-154.
62 
 
                                                        
60 Id. § 14-154(f)(1)-(5). 
61 See New York City Police Dep ’t, Civil Immigration Detainers, available at  
https://www.nyc.gov/site/nypd/stats/reports-analysis/civil-immigration-detainers.page.   
 
62 Admin. Code § 10-178(d). 
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 34  
 
 Patrol Guide 212 -126 sets out the NYPD’s procedures for documenting 
requests for support intended to further immigration enforcement. Once action has 
been taken, the Operations Unit is required to “[r]ecord notifications and actions in a 
database that will be accessible for statistical analysis.” 63 Since at least 2018, the 
NYPD logged these events in an incident reporting database with the tag 
“Immigration Assist/Support.” Since 2025, the Operations Unit at the NYPD has also 
maintained a spreadsheet of all civil immigration detainers received. 64 The incident 
reporting database includes the date, time, and location of requests, as well as a brief 
“Incident Type,” i.e. , “Assault” or “Migrant Arrest,” and the tag “Immigration 
Assist/Support.” However, DOI has concluded that the NYPD’s reporting database 
complies with City law and policy only in part. It does not include the “response or 
actions taken in response,” as required by Local Law 228,
65 nor the identity of t he 
requesting agency, as required in guidance promulgated by the Mayor’s Office in 
2018.
66 These recordkeeping shortcomings should be addressed by the NYPD, as set 
forth below in Recommendation #5. 
 
Furthermore, based on DOI’s analysis, the NYPD’s databases do not include 
all instances in which the NYPD was asked for immigration assistance from federal 
authorities. For example, in a report issued by the NYPD in 2021, the NYPD reported 
seven instances in which they provided information to federal immigration 
authorities from July 1, 2020 to June 30, 2021, but none of those instances appear in 
the NYPD’s databases.
67 Indeed the database contains only thirty-three entries since 
2018. The fugitive incident and the task force request incident, both discussed above, 
also do not appear in the databases. These omissions make clear that the NYPD is 
underreporting requests for immigration enforcement assistance in the databases 
that it has designated for recording those events. 
 
 The quarterly reports required by Local Law 228 are compiled by MOIA.
68 On 
December 30, 2024, MOIA issued guidance to City agencies on compliance with Local 
                                                        
63 Patrol Guide 212-126 ¶ 12.  
64 Civil immigration detainers fall outside of Local Law 228’s recordkeeping and reporting 
requirements. See Admin. Code § 10-178(d) (“Such report shall not be required to include information 
contained in reports required pursuant to section 9-131.”). 
65 Admin. Code § 10-178(d). 
66 See Fuleihan, supra note 15. 
67 See New York City Police Dep ’t, Summary of Statistics on ICE Detainers July 1, 2020 to June 30, 
2021 (last visited  Oct. 14, 2025), available at  
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/nypd/downloads/pdf/analysis_and_planning/civil_immigration_detainers/
summary-civil-immigration-detainers-2020-2021.pdf (e mphasis added).  
68 These reports can be located through the search function on the Government Publications Portal  
maintained by NYC Records & Information Services, available at https://a860-gpp.nyc.gov/catalog.  
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 35  
 
Law 228, including its recordkeeping and reporting requirements. 69 Agencies are 
directed to send reports to MOIA at LocalLaw228@moia.nyc.gov n o later than ten 
days after the end of each fiscal quarter. 70 MOIA provides agencies with a template 
format to use for those reports, and MOIA consolidates agency responses into a single 
report for the City Council. Finally, MOIA directs City agencies to develop policies to 
implement Local Law 228, to the extent they have not done so already.71 
 
 MOIA’s Local Law 228 reports from 2022 through the present reflect only one 
instance in which the NYPD was asked for assistance with civil immigration 
enforcement, a part from civil immigration detainers.
72 However, MOIA’s reports 
reflect potential confusion about the City’s Local Law 228 obligations. Until the end 
of 2024, each report filed by MOIA with New York City Records & Information 
Services included the description, “a report on civil immigration detainers received 
from federal immigration authorities and information on individuals held and 
transferred pursuant to civil immigration detainers,” despite Local Law 228 explicitly 
exempting civil immigration detainers  from its reporting ambit.
73 Since that time, 
MOIA’s reports have been properly labeled as “quarterly report[s] on incidents 
involving non-local law enforcement's requests for assistance on immigration matters 
from New York City agencies, and the response of such agencies” on the New York 
City Records & Information Services webpage.  
 
During the period from 2024 to the present, the NYPD only submitted 
information on civil immigration detainers to MOIA for its reports. As such, DOI has 
concluded that the NYPD’s submissions to MOIA are not in compliance with Local 
Law 228. As noted above, the NYPD has collected some information about non-
detainer requests for assistance with civil immigration assistance. For example, a 
database entry from February 10, 2025 refl ects an “arrest” that the NYPD flagged 
with an “incident type” label of “immigration assist/support.” The NYPD has since 
clarified that this “arrest” did not relate to civil immigration enforcement and was 
improperly coded by the Operations Unit. But that error only exemplifies the need 
for the NYPD to improve its recordkeeping. Moreover, the NYPD’s recent clarification 
                                                        
69 Commissioner Manuel Castro, Guidance for Agency Implementation of Administrative Code §  10-
178, M AYOR’S OFFICE OF IMMIGRANT AFFAIRS (Dec. 30, 2024), available at 
https://www.politico.com/f/?id=00000194-90a0-dbde-a7d6-f5b34b5e0000. This guidance is 
substantively similar to the guidance issued by the then-First Deputy Mayor in January of 2018. 
70 Id. 
71 Id. 
72 That instance, which took place in 2022, involved an NYPD employee who allowed a prosecutor with 
the New York County District Attorney’s Office (DANY) to use an NYPD phone to contact ICE, after 
which an individual in DANY’s custody was transferred to ICE’s custody.  It does not appear in the 
NYPD’s database. 
73 See Admin. Code § 10-178(d) (“Such report shall not be required to include information contained in 
reports required pursuant to section 9-131, 9-205, or 14-154.”). 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 36  
 
does not explain why the NYPD did not report this entry (or others like it) to MOIA 
when MOIA’s quarterly report was authored, as required by Local Law 228. The entry 
had been coded as an “immigration assist/support” event at the time, even if 
improperly. Instead, the NYPD reported information only on civil immigration 
detainers, which are exempted from Local Law 228’s reporting ambit. Non-detainer 
events in the NYPD’s databases were not reported to MOIA. 
 
C. Local Law 246 of 2017: Agency Policies on Restricting Access of Law Enforcement 
Officers to City Property 
 
 Local Law 246, which restricts the access of law enforcement officers to City 
property, includes the following provision: “Any agency with jurisdiction over city 
property shall adopt guidelines or rules, as appropriate, to implement this section or, 
alternatively, the mayor or an office or agency designated by the mayor may adopt 
guidelines or rules applicable to multiple agencies, in furtherance of the efficient 
implementation of this section.”
74 The law requires “any generalized guidelines or 
rules, including agency -wide guidelines or rules, regarding limited access to city 
property” to be “posted on a website maintained by or on behalf of the city.”75 
 
 The Mayor’s Office of Operations maintains a website including links to Local 
Law 246 (codified at New York City Administrative Code §  4-210) and citywide 
implementation guidance.
76 The guidance was promulgated by the Law Department 
and is “applicable to all agencies and meant to aid agencies’ understanding and 
efficient implementation of Section 4 -210.”
77 The Law Department’s guidelines 
include very few mandatory provisions, providing only that “agencies should limit 
access to any part of their property that is not normally open to all members of the 
public,” and that agencies must “designate an individual who shall be responsible for 
the implementation of” § 4- 210.
78 Otherwise, the Law Depar tment guidelines 
                                                        
74 Admin. Code § 4-210(e). 
75 Admin. Code § 4-210(f). 
76 Mayor’s Office of Operations, Access to City Property , available at  
https://www.nyc.gov/site/operations/about/access-to-city-property.page.  
77 New York City Law Dep’ t, Guidelines on Access to City Property , available at  
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/pdf/Guidelines-on-Access-to-City-Property.pdf.  
78 Id. at 2. 
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 37  
 
encourage agencies to adopt their own agency -specific guidelines 79 and provide a 
“recommended sample policy” that agencies can follow.80 
 
 The Mayor’s Office of Operations website also includes the agency -specific 
policies for a variety of agencies, including DOI, the Taxi and Limousine Commission, 
the Department of Transportation, the Business Integrity Commission, the 
Department of Environmental Protection, the Department of Citywide 
Administrative Services, and the Mayor’s Office to End Domestic and Gender-Based 
Violence.
81 The website does not include an NYPD policy.  
 
When asked about its Local Law 246 policy, the NYPD informed DOI that it 
had not promulgated a Local Law 246 policy, apart from general statements in Patrol 
Guide 121-126 and Operations Order No. 4 prohibiting the use of City property to 
assist in immigration enforcement. Local Law 246 requires more than a general 
policy statement; it requires guidelines sufficient to inform agency personnel when 
non-local law enforcement agen cies may access City property, like when “access 
furthers the purpose or mission of a city agency.”
82 As such, DOI has concluded that 
the NYPD is not complying with Local Law 246. The NYPD informed DOI that it is 
now in the process of amending NYPD policy to track the requirements of § 4-210, as 
has been recommended below in Recommendation #7. 
 
VII. Findings and Recommendations 
 
The NYPD’s policies seek to facilitate the flow of information between the 
NYPD and its federal partners for purpose of criminal investi gations and also to 
prevent information -sharing or other NYPD assistance in civil immigration 
enforcement, as local law requires. DOI recognizes the difficulty of this task, 
particularly given the changing landscape of federal law enforcement priorities; 
during this investigation, DOI uncovered relatively few incidents in which the 
NYPD’s compliance with local law could be questioned. However, several instances 
discussed in this report highlight gaps in the agency’s current policies and practices 
that raise the risk of improper information sharing or assistance. DOI’s review also 
                                                        
79 See, e.g., id. at 1 (“General counsels at agencies that provide benefits or social services to the public 
are encouraged to craft their own guidelines  . . .”); id. at 2 (“City agencies may restrict access to their 
premises via written policies and consistent practices.”); id. at 2 (“Agency general counsels may issue 
a policy informing agency employees when they should grant access to non-public areas of city property 
for specific routine interactions with governmental personal that further an agency’s purpose or 
mission.”). 
80 Id. at 3. 
81 Mayor’s Office of Operations, supra note 76. 
82 Admin. Code §  4-210(b)(5). As an example, DOI’s policy can be found on the Mayor’s Office of 
Operations’ website. See Michael B. Siller, Guidance for DOI Implementation of Local Law 246 of 2017 
(May 24, 2018), available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/pdf/DOI-Policy-re-LL-
246-5-24-2018.pdf.  
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 38  
 
identified several ways in which the NYPD is only partially complying with the 
recordkeeping and reporting requirements mandated by local law.  
 
DOI recognizes the challenge that NY PD personnel face in differentiating 
requests from federal authorities made in connection with criminal investigations 
from those made in connection with civil immigration matters. In the cases of both 
Ms. Kordia and Mr. Gutiérrez Flores, the NYPD’s assist ance to federal agents was 
used to further civil immigration purposes, even though it was not clear from the 
requests to which the NYPD was responding that the assistance would be used for 
civil immigration enforcement. DOI also recognizes that the NYPD cannot control the 
downstream usage of information shared with federal authorities in criminal 
investigations, nor can the NYPD be expected to investigate representations made by 
each of their federal law enforcement partners that assistance requested is for  
criminal enforcement, beyond determining that the request reasonably relates to a 
specific ongoing criminal enforcement matter. Nevertheless, this report issues 
several recommendations regarding how the NYPD can modify its policies and 
practices to better comply with the local laws restricting the use of City resources for 
immigration enforcement. Adoption of these recommendations would help ensure 
uniform procedures are implemented with respect to how the NYPD responds to 
requests from federal authorities  and could mitigate the risk that information is 
unwittingly provided to federal authorities for civil immigration enforcement. 
 
A. Recommendation #1: The NYPD Should Amend its Policies to Require Enhanced Review 
of All Custody Transfers to Federal Agents, Not Only Transfers to “Federal Civil 
Immigration Agents.” 
 
As set forth in Operations Order No. 4, NYPD members are required to 
escalate requests for custodial transfers to federal agents only when “federal civil 
immigration agents present a member of servic e with papers to take an individual 
from Department custody.” 83  Mr. Gutiérrez Flores’s case makes clear that even 
informal requests for custodial transfers from federal agents whose primary role is 
not civil immigration enforcement can nevertheless result in an individual being 
placed in immigration detention.  
 
The limitation in Operations Order No. 4 that the NYPD only scrutinize 
custodial transfer requests presented “with papers” from “federal civil immigration 
agents” is unduly narrow in light of current federal practice, which has significantly 
expanded the group of agencies responsible for federal immigration enforcement. 
Furthermore, New York City Administrative Code §  14-154 sets forth conditions 
under which formal civil immigration detainers may be honored, but it applies 
equally to “any similar federal request for detention of a person suspected of violating 
                                                        
83 Operations Order No. 4 ¶ 14. 
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 39  
 
civil immigration law.”84 To ensure officers comply with the law with respect to all 
federal requests for detention, NYPD policy should require officers to inquire into the 
basis for all requests for custodial transfers made by federal agents—not just formal, 
written requests from civil immigration agents—to determine whether those requests 
are a “similar federal request for detention of a person suspected of violating civil 
immigration law,” and to follow appropriate procedures if they are.85  
 
The volume of requests for custodial transfers is likely limited, such that 
conducting a basic inquiry into their purpose would not be unduly burdensome to the 
NYPD. By adopting this change, the NYPD can mitigate the risk that they detain or 
transfer individuals into federal custody not knowing that these actions in fact are 
for purposes of civil immigration enforcement. 
 
B. Recommendation #2: The NYPD Should Update and Formalize its Procedure for 
Responding to Detainer Requests from Federal Agents into a Comprehensive Written 
Policy. 
 
At present, the only NYPD policy document addressing the restrictions on 
honoring detainers set forth in New York City Administra tive Code § 14-154 is 
Operations Order No. 4, which has a discussion of detainers that reads in full: 
 
Should federal civil immigration agents present a member of service 
with papers to take an individual from Department custody, the member 
of service will  immediately contact the Operations Division and an 
executive in the member of service’s operational command. The 
Operations Division will notify the Legal Bureau. No individual is to be 
released from Department custody to civil immigration authorities 
without authorization from both an executive in the member of service’s 
operational command and a Legal Bureau executive. 
 
This policy is inconsistent with the current practice that the NYPD explained to DOI, 
in which the Criminal Justice Bureau determines whether detainer requests will be 
honored rather than the Legal Bureau. Furthermore, the policy as written fails to 
provide enough information to give NYPD members practical guidance on how to 
process detainer requests from federal agents. 
 
 To provide clear guidance for NYPD personnel, the NYPD should adopt a 
standalone policy on detainer requests that addresses, at a minimum: 
                                                        
84 Admin. Code § 14-154(a)(1). 
85 DOI defers to the NYPD’s expertise in determining whether to follow a formal procedure for 
scrutinizing the nature of a request for a custodial transfer or a more informal procedure, like that 
required for other types of requests by  the Chief of Detectives Memo (and like the NYPD followed in 
honoring the FBI’s request for custody over Mr. Gutierrez Flores).   
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 40  
 
 
1. What kinds of detention requests are subject to the policy 
(incorporating Recommendation #1, above, by ensuring that informal 
requests and requests from non -civil immigration agents are 
scrutinized); 
2. What documentation and information should be collected to process 
a detainer request (i.e., a judicial warrant and proof of a conviction 
for a serious crime);  
3. The appropriate NYPD division to which detainer requests should be 
directed; and 
4. The standards against which decisions whether to honor detainers 
should be assessed.  
By adopting a more detailed and comprehensive policy for processing detainer 
requests that could relate to civil immi gration detentions, the NYPD can better 
ensure that cases are handled uniformly and avoid situations in which civil 
immigration detainers are honored unwittingly. 
 
C. Recommendation #3: The NYPD Should Improve Its Policies for Processing Requests for 
Assistance from Federal Agents by Providing Additional Guidance. 
 
The NYPD’s policies for responding to requests for assistance from federal 
agents that may relate to civil immigration enforcement are currently located in four 
separate documents —Patrol Guide 212 -126, Operations Order No. 4, the Chief of 
Detectives Memo, and the Deputy Commissioner Memo. These policies set a strong 
foundation for complying with local law, but they are missing several key elements. 
At a minimum, they should be amended in the following respects: 
 
1. Assessing Whether the Civil Immigration Policies Apply : Patrol Guide 
212-126 applies to requests “to support or assist in immigration 
enforcement,” and Operations Order No. 4 applies when an NYPD 
member “encounters federal agents engaged in ci vil immigration 
enforcement,” but neither policy provides sufficient guidance on how to 
identify whether requests or encounters further immigration 
enforcement.
86 Likewise, both the Chief of Detectives Memo and the 
Deputy Commissioner Memo set forth procedu res for dealing with 
federal requests “unrelated” to joint investigations without setting forth 
how to determine whether a request is related to a task force 
                                                        
86 Operations Order No. 4 includes a non- exhaustive list of four examples of conduct that would 
constitute assistance with civil immigration enforcement. See Operations Order No. 4 ¶ 6. The NYPD 
should build on this foundation through additional guidance and training. 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 41  
 
investigation. As the Row and Roosevelt Hotel operation incident and 
the federal fugitive incident  highlight, officers often face complex or 
ambiguous situations where the nature of the request is unclear.  While 
no policy can capture every possible scenario, more detailed guidance 
and additional training would assist officers in determining the 
incidents to which NYPD policies apply. 
 
2. Routing Requests for Information about Unknown Subjects : Both the 
Chief of Detectives Memo and the Deputy Commissioner Memo clearly 
explain that federal requests for information about unknown subjects 
should be routed to appropriate TFOs. However, this requirement is not 
present in Patrol Guide 212 -126 or Operations Order No. 4, which are 
more broadly applicable. Those policies should be amended to provide 
clear guidance to all  members of service on where federal requests for 
information from unknown subjects should be routed, ideally in a single, 
generally applicable policy document. 
 
3. Documenting the Basis for Determining a Request Does Not Relate to 
Civil Immigration Enforcement: Both the Chief of Detectives Memo and 
the Deputy Commissioner Memo require NYPD personnel to engage in 
a dialogue with federal officers seeking information about unknown 
subjects to determine whether the information will be used in 
furtherance of civil immigration purposes. Although both policies 
require NYPD personnel to document the federal request in an “external 
agency request form” if they conclude that the request should be 
honored, neither requires the personnel to document how they 
concluded the request relates to a criminal matter. The NYP D should 
require this information to be documented in its “external agency 
request form.” Doing so would help ensure compliance with NYPD 
policies both by ensuring that NYPD personnel make informed decisions 
when information is requested from federal agent s and by facilitating 
oversight on those decisions. 
 
By adopting these changes, the NYPD can help ensure that requests for information 
from federal law enforcement agencies are handled uniformly and can avoid 
situations in which information provided to fed eral agents is used for civil 
immigration purposes without NYPD’s knowledge and consent.  
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 42  
 
D. Recommendation #4: The NYPD Should Provide Officers with Further Training on When 
and How to Report and Document Requests for Assistance from Federal Law 
Enforcement. 
 
Operations Order No. 4 and Patrol Guide 212 -126 set out clear procedures to 
be followed when members of the NYPD receive a request for assistance with federal 
immigration enforcement. However, DOI’s investigation revealed several instances 
in which NYPD  members failed to follow those procedures, resulting in failures to 
convey to other members of the NYPD the immigration -related nature of certain 
federal requests and failures to document certain information in Department 
databases as NYPD policy and loca l law requires. For example, the Chief of 
Detectives failed to proactively inform the Legal Bureau of ICE’s potential 
involvement in the Row and Roosevelt operation; the lieutenant involved in the 
fugitive incident did not disclose the immigration nexus to  their colleagues when 
reporting the facts of the incident to them, resulting in inconsistent internal reporting 
as to whether the incident had an immigration nexus; and the task force officer who 
received a request from federal counterparts to put civil -immigration “alerts” on 
individuals did not report the request. As a result, the database that, per Patrol Guide 
212-126, should capture information about non- detainer requests from federal 
immigration authorities, contains only thirty -three entries since 2 018, which likely 
understates the number of such requests the NYPD has received. 
 
To increase the effectiveness of NYPD’s policies and procedures for responding 
to requests for assistance with civil immigration enforcement, and to avoid the lapses 
identified in this investigation, DOI recommends that the NYPD provide its members 
with further training on how to identify situations that trigger reporting obligations 
under Operations Order No. 4 or Patrol Guide 212 -126. As part of that effort, the 
NYPD should work to increase the percentage of personnel who have certified that 
they have read Operations Order No. 4. As of June 2025, that number was at 42%. 
Although the NYPD explained that Operations Order No. 4 had been viewed by 
NYPD personnel at a rate  in the 99th percentile of NYPD  policies, increasing that 
number will bolster the agency’s efforts to comply with the local law.  
 
E. Recommendation #5: The NYPD Should Improve Its Recordkeeping and Reporting 
Pursuant to Local Law 228. 
 
DOI’s investigation of the NYP D’s compliance with Local Law 228 revealed 
that the NYPD is not complying with the law’s recordkeeping and reporting 
requirements in several respects. 
 
As to recordkeeping, the NYPD’s databases for tracking requests for assistance 
with civil immigration enforcement currently documents the date, time, and location 
of the requests and includes only a cursory description of the request, like “Migrant 
Arrest.” Local Law 228 requires that the NYPD also track the “response or actions 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 43  
 
taken in response” to the request.87 Mayoral guidance requires the NYPD to note the 
federal agency that made the request. 88 The NYPD does not track this information 
and they should begin doing so to come into full compliance with local law and policy. 
Furthermore, additional information about the nature of the request —as little as a 
brief, one-sentence narrative—would greatly improve the quality of the data tracked 
by the NYPD. DOI recommends that the NYPD make these three changes to its 
database for recording requests for assistance with civil immigration enforcement. 
 
 As to reporting, the NYPD has for years reported only the number of civil 
immigration detainers it received to MOIA for MOIA’s quarterly reports to the City 
Council. It has not reported the events marked as “Immigration A ssist/Support” in 
its own database, nor the events that were discussed above in this report. The 
reporting required by Local Law 228 includes non -detainer requests for assistance 
with civil immigration enforcement. 89 DOI recommends that the NYPD begin 
comprehensively reporting requests for assistance with civil immigration 
enforcement to MOIA for its quarterly reporting to help the City come into compliance 
with Local Law 228. 
 
F. Recommendation #6: The NYPD Should Conduct an Email Audit of NYPD Members 
Assigned to Federal Task Forces. 
 
The paucity of the non- detainer entries in the NYPD’s databases for tracking 
requests for assistance with immigration enforcement (and the fact that the 
databases do not include incidents like the HSI Violent Gang Task Force requ est 
described above) raises questions about whether the NYPD is aware of all such 
requests received by officers from federal officials for assistance with civil 
immigration enforcement and whether members are following relevant NYPD 
policies after receiving those requests. To better understand its own compliance with 
local laws, the NYPD should conduct a targeted email audit of NYPD members 
assigned to federal task forces to determine whether other requests have gone 
unreported and, if so, to remedy any noncompliance. 
 
G. Recommendation #7: The NYPD Should Adopt Guidelines Implementing Local Law 246. 
 
As noted above, Local Law 246 of 2017 requires City agencies to limit the 
access law enforcement agents have to non -public areas of City property except for 
                                                        
87 Admin. Code § 10-178(d). 
88 See Fuleihan, supra note 15.  
89 Indeed, detainer requests are exempted from Local Law 228’s reporting requirements, as they are 
covered under Local Law 59’s complimentary reporting requirements. See Admin. Code § 10-178(d) 
(“such report shall not be required to include information contained in reports required pursuant to 
section 9-131 . . .”). 
 
NYPD Civil Immigration Enforcement Report December 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 44  
 
specific purposes.90 That law provides that “[a]ny agency with jurisdiction over city 
property shall adopt guidelines or rules, as appropriate, to implement this section or, 
alternatively, the mayor or an office or agency designated by the mayor may adopt 
guidelines or rules applicable to multiple agencies.” 91 Local Law 246 also provides 
that every agency must “designat[e] an individual . . . who shall be responsible for the 
implementation of this local law and any [implementing] guidelines or rules.” 92 The 
NYPD has not adopted guidelines implementing Local Law 246. It has not adopted 
the Law Department’s recommended policy.93 And it has not designated an individual 
responsible for Local Law 246 compliance. The NYPD should promptly take these 
steps to come into compl iance with Local Law 246.  DOI raised this issue with the 
NYPD and the NYPD is currently working to come into compliance with this law. 
 
VIII. Conclusion 
 
Local law sets clear restrictions on the manner in which the NYPD can 
cooperate with federal law enforcemen t on matters related to civil immigration 
enforcement. Although DOI believes that the NYPD has been working diligently to 
ensure that its policies for assisting federal law enforcement agencies comply with 
those local laws, in at least one recent case, NYPD resources were put to use to assist 
with civil immigration enforcement and there may be other examples that are still 
not known. As discussed above, the NYPD’s policies for complying with local law 
should be improved. This report makes several recommenda tions that the NYPD 
should implement to mitigate the risk that its officers assist federal law enforcement 
with civil immigration enforcement, even unknowingly.  
 
                                                        
90 Admin. Code § 4-210(b). 
91 Id. § 4-210(d); see also Michael B. Siller, Guidance for DOI Implementation of Local Law 246 of 
2017 (May 24, 2018), available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/pdf/DOI-Policy-
re-LL-246-5-24-2018.pdf.  
92 Id. 
93 Mayor’s Office of Operations, supra note 76.  
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix A 
 
 
 
 



 
 
 
 
Appendix B 
 
 
 
 
PATROL GUIDE
Section: Command Operations Procedure No: 212-126
REQUESTS TO PROVIDE CITY RESOURCES FOR IMMIGRATION
ENFORCEMENT
DATE EFFECTIVE: LAST REVISION: PAGE:
07/09/25 R.O. 59 1 of 2
NEW  YORK  CITY  POLICE  DEPARTMENT
PURPOSE To provide members of the service with guidelines when a non-local law
enforcement agency requests, or a member of the service proposes, that the
Department provide City resources (i.e., traffic control, vehicle escorts, site security,
information or records under the control of the New York State Department of
Motor Vehicles [DMV], etc.) to support or assist in immigration enforcement.
DEFINITIONS CITY PROPERTY - Any real property leased or owned by the City that serves a
City governmental purpose and over which the City has operational control.
CITY RESOURCES - Including, but not limited to, time spent by members of
the service while on duty, use of City owned equipment, or use of City property.
IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT - The enforcement of any civil provision of
the Immigration and Nationality Act and any provision of such law that penalizes
a person’s presence in, entry into, or reentry into the United States.
SCOPE Members of the service may not use City resources to support or assist in
immigration enforcement, except in certain circumstances, as described below.
PROCEDURE When a non-local law enforcement agency requests, or a member of the service
proposes, that the Department provide City resources (i.e., traffic control, vehicle
escorts, site security, information or records under the control of the New York
State DMV, etc.) to support or assist in immigration enforcement:
MEMBER OF
THE SERVICE
RECEIVING
REQUEST OR
MAKING
PROPOSAL
1. Notify desk officer, command of occurrence.
2. Provide details of request, or proposed use, including:
a. Agency requesting assistance
b. Type of assistance requested or proposed
c. Reason for request or proposal.
DESK
OFFICER,
COMMAND OF
OCCURRENCE
3. Notify Operations Unit.
4. Provide details of request or proposal.
5. Make Command Log entry with pertinent details.
OPERATIONS
UNIT
6. Notify duty chief.
7. Provide details of request or proposal.
DUTY CHIEF 8. Confer with Legal Bureau regarding request or proposal.
9. Determine action to be taken after reviewing the grounds of the request or
proposal, considering the need to ensure public safety.
10. Notify Operations Unit of action taken.
PATROL GUIDE
PROCEDURE NUMBER: DATE EFFECTIVE: LAST REVISION: PAGE:
212-126 07/09/25 R.O. 59 2 of 2
NEW  YORK  CITY  POLICE  DEPARTMENT
NOTE In emergency, public safety related situations, the decision to support the non-local law
enforcement agency will be made by the highest ranking uniformed member of the
service at the scene, or in the absence of a supervisor, the senior uniformed member of
the service at the scene. That member must immediately notify the Operations Unit of
this decision and include details of the circumstances.
There is no emergency exception regarding DMV records. Criminal liability for disclosing
these records still applies and is prohibited prior to consultation with the Legal Bureau.
Whenever a uniformed member of the service enforces a State or local criminal law at
the scene of an immigration enforcement incident, the highest ranking uniformed
member of the service at the scene must notify the Operations Unit regarding details of
incident.
OPERATIONS
UNIT
11. Notify desk officer, command of occurrence, of action taken or to be
taken.
12. Record notifications and actions in a database that will be accessible for
statistical analysis.
ADDITIONAL
DATA
It is a class E felony under the Vehicle and Traffic Law (VTL), to use DMV records in
furtherance of immigration enforcement, or to disclose such records to any non-local law
enforcement agency that primarily conducts immigration enforcement. The only exception
to the law is if DMV records are to be disclosed in connection with a cooperative
agreement (e.g., a task force that is not primarily intended to further immigration
enforcement). When a member of the service receives a request from a non-local law
enforcement agency that primarily conducts immigration enforcement, and is a member of
a taskforce or other cooperative agreement, the member of the service must ascertain the
purpose for which the information is sought. Conferrals between the duty chief and the
Legal Bureau will focus on whether such requests, and the production of records fall
within the mission or scope of the taskforce or agreement.
Members of the services are reminded of Patrol Guide 212-66, “City Policy Concerning
Identifying Information and Access to City Services” that affirms the City’s policy of
providing essential services to all residents regardless of immigration status.
 
 
 
 
Appendix C 
 
 
 
 
OPERATIONS ORDER
SUBJECT: CIVIL IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT
DATE ISSUED: NUMBER:
01-18-25 4
Page 1 of 2
1. In various contexts, members of service may encounter federal agents engaged in civil
immigration enforcement. Members of service may also interact with individuals potentially subject to civil
immigration enforcement. This directive serves as a reminder of city and state law that govern these matters.
It also provides operational guidance to members of service in such situations.
2. The core principle for all members of service is to keep in mind the distinction between
criminal enforcement and civil immigration enforcement.
3. The Department investigates criminal activity without regard to a person’s immigration
status. The Department continues to work daily with federal law enforcement agencies in connection with
a wide range of criminal investigations. In particular, the Department participates in task forces with a
variety of federal law enforcement agencies investigating violations of federal criminal law.
4. The fact that a person is present in the United States without lawful authorization is a civil
matter, not a crime. That person is subject to civil immigration enforcement by federal authorities, which
may result in detention and deportation.
5. City law prohibits the use of city resources for “enforcement of any civil provision of the
Immigration and Nationality Act and any provision of such law that penalizes a person’s presence in, entry
into, or reentry into the United States” Administrative Code § 10-178.
6. Accordingly, members of service are not permitted to engage in civil immigration
enforcement, assist in any manner with civil immigration enforcement, or allow any Department resources
to be used in connection with civil immigration enforcement. Prohibited actions include, but are not limited
to:
a. Contacting federal civil immigration authorities to let them know where an individual is
located;
b. Detaining an individual so that federal civil immigration agents can take that person into
custody;
c. Facilitating street closures to enable civil immigration enforcement;
d. Allowing Department facilities to be utilized in connection with civil immigration
enforcement.
7. At the same time, members of service will not take any action that will interfere with or
impede civil immigration enforcement undertaken by federal authorities. If an individual is subject to civil
immigration enforcement by federal agents and asserts that such enforcement is based in error or is
impermissible, that individual has legal recourse through immigration proceedings and in the courts. The
Department does not take a position on who is properly subject to civil immigration enforcement.
8. To the extent federal immigration authorities are engaged in a civil enforcement operation
and encounter individuals who are blocking or otherwise obstructing their activity, the federal authorities
alone will take enforcement action consistent with their own rules and procedures. Members of service will
OPERATIONS ORDER NO. 4
Page 2 of 2
not assist with that enforcement action unless the individuals are engaged in conduct that, separate and apart
from obstructing civil immigration enforcement, poses an immediate threat to public safety.
9. Should a federal civil immigration officer come under physical attack, members of service
will act to protect that officer as they would any other person.
10. When speaking with crime victims, witnesses, suspects, or persons subject to enforcement
action, including arrest, members of service are not to inquire regarding that person’s immigration status
except in the rare situations where that status is relevant to the criminal investigation at issue.
11. If a uniformed member of service encounters federal agents engaged in civil immigration
enforcement, the uniformed member of service will immediately notify the desk officer who will notify the
Operations Division. The Operations Division will then notify the duty chief, who will confer with the Legal
Bureau and notify the Operations Division. The Operations Division will then inform the desk officer
concerned.
12. Absent exigent circumstances, a uniformed member of service who encounters federal
agents engaged in civil immigration enforcement is not to take any action unless an order to do so is given
by an executive member of the Department on scene. That executive must consult with a Legal Bureau
executive unless exigent circumstances make such a consultation impracticable.
13. The Operations Division is to monitor ICAD for radio runs regarding civil immigration
enforcement. In such a circumstance, the Operations Division is to immediately notify the applicable
commanding officer or duty captain, a Patrol Borough executive, and the Legal Bureau. The
Communications Section will dispatch a patrol supervisor to the relevant location.
14. Should federal civil immigration agents present a member of service with papers to take an
individual from Department custody, the member of service will immediately contact the Operations
Division and an executive in the member of service’s operational command. The Operations Division will
notify the Legal Bureau. No individual is to be released from Department custody to civil immigration
authorities without authorization from both an executive in the member of service’s operational command
and a Legal Bureau executive.
15. There are a small number of federal criminal laws in the Immigration and Nationality Act
that provide for a criminal penalty because of a person’s unlawful entry or reentry into the United States.
The rules set forth in this operations order regarding civil immigration enforcement apply equally to those
criminal laws. Otherwise, this operations order has no application to criminal investigations or criminal law
enforcement.
16. Commanding officers will ensure the contents of this Order are brought to the attention of
members of their commands.
BY DIRECTION OF THE POLICE COMMISSIONER
DISTRIBUTION
All Commands
 
 
 
 
Appendix D 
 
 
 
 
 
CHIEF OF DETECTIVES 
MEMO 
 
 
 
 
NUMBER:         1 of 2025      DATE: July 7, 2025 
 
SUBJECT:    EXTERNAL REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION FROM FEDERAL LAW  
                       ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES   
 
PURPOSE:    Mandatory Procedure for Review and Documentation  
 
Members of the service assigned to the Real Time Crime Center are directed not to provide  
information directly to members of federal law enforcement agencies.  A request for information 
from a federal law enforcement agency  must be directed to a n NYPD detective, who has been 
designated as a Task Force Officer (TFO)  assigned to a federal  criminal task force with that 
agency.  In the event that a federal  law enforcement agency  contacts a member of the Real Time 
Crime Center requesting information, the member is to inform the agency of this policy and direct 
the agency to contact the appropriate task force. In the event that a federal employee making an 
inquiry does not have contact information for the  appropriate task force, the number will be 
provided by Real Time Crime personnel.  
 
When a TFO is contacted by a  federal law enforcement agency  regarding a request for 
information unrelated to an ongoing criminal investigation being conducted by the task force in 
which that TFO participates , the TFO must notify a supervising TFO.  The supervising TFO  will 
confer with the federal law enforcement agency  regarding the request. Once the supervising TFO 
determines that the request is in connection  with an active criminal investigation , the supervising 
TFO will contact the Real Time Crime Center on the federal law enforcement  agency’s behalf and 
request the information. 
 
When a member of the Real Time Crime Center receives a call from a supervising TFO regarding 
a federal law enforcement agency ’s request for information, the member  will complete a RTCC 
external agency request form documenting the inquiry.  Additionally, the member will notify a 
supervisor before completing t he request .  The information will then be provided to the 
supervising TFO, who will forward the results of the inquiry to the requesting agency.  
 
 
Members of the Detective Bureau are reminded t o adhere to the contents of  Operations Order 4 of 
2025.  
 
 
 
FOR YOUR IMMEDIATE AND STRICT COMPLIANCE.                   
 
 
 
 
 
Joseph E. Kenny  
Chief of Detectives 
 

 
 
 
 
Appendix E 
 
 
 
 
