LEADING THE WAY 
FOR NYC SCHOOLS 
Recommendations for the Next Administration 
Excellent public schools are essential to making New York City an attractive place to live and raise a 
family and to ensuring a strong foundation for our City’s future.  Mayor Mamdani and Chancellor 
Samuels have taken the helm of a school system that is in many ways in flux.  While the days of 
remote learning are behind us, rates of chronic absenteeism remain far higher than they were pre-
pandemic, the academic aftershocks of missed instructional time have not fully subsided, and countless 
young people are struggling with mental health challenges. Declining birth rates and out-migration 
from the five boroughs have sparked concerns about long-term enrollment trends, even as tens of 
thousands of newcomer immigrant students entered the public schools in recent years. In addition to 
ongoing state and local priorities—from implementing new English Language Arts curricula in 
elementary schools to preparing for the rollout of the State’s new graduation framework—City 
schools are grappling with the ripple effects of increased immigration enforcement; attacks on 
transgender and nonbinary youth; and other changes in the national political climate. 
Regardless of what happens at the federal level in the years ahead, it will be essential for New York 
City Public Schools (NYCPS) to remain focused on the critical task of ensuring all young people 
receive the support they need to learn and thrive. Based on our experience helping thousands of 
New York City families each year, we urge the new Mayoral Administration to: 
1.
Ensure every student has access to effective literacy instruction and intervention, building on the
work of NYC Reads.
2. Increase access to mental health services and ensure schools can safely and effectively support
students’ social-emotional and behavioral needs.
3. Improve educational services, programs, opportunities, and outcomes for students with disabilities.

A DVO C AT E S  FO R  C H I L D R EN  OF  NE W  YO RK 
2 
4. Expand program options for English Language Learners (ELLs) and immigrant youth, recruit more
bilingual teachers and service providers, and ensure ELLs receive appropriate academic instruction
and support.
5. Ensure highly mobile youth—including students experiencing homelessness, students in the foster
system, and students in the juvenile or criminal legal system—receive the support they need to
succeed in school.
6. Create a school transportation system that works for the students, families, and schools it is
intended to serve.
7. Improve communication with families, including those who speak languages other than English or
have low digital literacy, and prioritize building strong relationships between home and school.
8. Protect the safety and rights of undocumented students and families, LGBTQ+ youth, and other
marginalized student populations.
These recommendations, described in more detail below, are not intended to be an exhaustive list of 
every policy change the City should make to strengthen education; rather, we are identifying some of 
the key areas where Mayor Mamdani—and other elected officials—should focus attention, energy, and 
resources, based on our work assisting students and families on the ground.  
Beyond the specific recommendations we make in this document, we urge the new administration to 
pursue an education agenda with the following strategies at its core:   
•
Invest significant funding in education and ensure every school has the resources needed to serve
all students effectively.
•
Approach each policy change with a central focus on students who need the most support to
succeed in school or present the greatest likelihood of being left behind.
•
Tailor support to the needs of different communities and populations of students, including
students with disabilities and English Language Learners.
•
Set ambitious goals for tackling racial disparities across a wide array of educational opportunities
and outcomes.
•
Continue scaling up effective initiatives such as early childhood education and community schools.
As the largest school system in the nation, New York City has both an opportunity and a responsibility 
to lead. By taking on big challenges with bold ideas and standing firm in the face of threats to students’ 
civil rights, the Mamdani Administration can proactively demonstrate the power of public policy to 
improve the lives of children and their families. 
Updated January 2026 
- ► 

A DVO C AT E S  FO R  C H I L D R EN  OF  NE W  YO RK 
3 
Ensure every student has access to effective literacy 
instruction and intervention, building on the work of 
NYC Reads. 
Strengthen core instruction for all students by providing educators with 
ongoing support and coaching. 
For far too long, NYCPS has failed to meet the critical charge of ensuring all students learn to read: 
according to the 2025 New York State tests, only 56% of City students in grades 3–8—and just 44% of 
Black and Latinx students and 27% of students with disabilities—are reading proficiently. Requiring 
schools to use pre-approved English Language Arts (ELA) curricula in grades K–5—the hallmark of 
NYC Reads—was a critical first step towards eliminating ineffective approaches to teaching reading 
and promoting collaboration across the system, but any curriculum is only as good as its 
implementation. As the initiative expands to secondary grades and elementary schools continue to 
work to deploy new curricula successfully with students who require additional support, teachers and 
administrators will need additional training and at-the-elbow coaching to be able to use new materials 
and screening data successfully and differentiate instruction for students with a wide range of needs.  
Develop a robust system of intensive intervention and support for students 
across all grade levels who are struggling with reading.  
Even when core instruction is strong, there will always be a subset of students who need individualized 
attention and extra support to become proficient readers. In addition, there are many middle and high 
school students still struggling with foundational skills who need intensive intervention. At AFC, we 
often resort to suing for private school tuition or private tutoring for students who have dyslexia or 
other reading difficulties because there is a severe dearth of options for accessing such help within the 
public schools. NYCPS should expand access to one-on-one or small group instruction that targets 
students’ needs. The City could, for example, hire a new corps of reading interventionists; leverage 
existing staff to provide evidence-based intervention; or create district-level intervention hubs where 
students could receive support outside of school hours.  
Partner with families to support literacy learning. 
The City has taken initial steps to engage families in NYC Reads, but there remains much work to do 
to ensure that schools are responsive to parents’ concerns and engage with families effectively to 
support their students. NYCPS should provide teachers and administrators with the tools, training, and 
resources to foster two-way communication, provide families with information about the literacy 
curriculum and any interventions being used in their child’s school, offer those who want to support 
literacy instruction at home with the tools to do so, and establish clear pathways for accessing 
additional help if their child is struggling.  
For more information, please see AFC’s Ensuring All Students Learn to Read: Where We Go from Here. 
- ► 

A DVO C AT E S  FO R  C H I L D R EN  OF  NE W  YO RK 
4 
Increase access to mental health services and ensure 
schools can safely and effectively support students' 
social-emotional and behavioral needs. 
Ensure all students have access to direct mental health services and 
behavioral supports. 
•
Ensure every school has a school-based mental health clinic or a partnership with a community-
based mental health provider that can provide expedited referrals and support for students with
mental health needs.
•
Map out all mental health services available for young people and launch an outreach and
informational campaign to ensure parents, students, and school staff know about the mental health
services available and how to access them.
•
Hire at least one behavioral specialist per district who can provide direct services to students, and
provide training and coaching for existing school staff in culturally competent, evidence-based,
trauma-informed approaches for addressing student behavior.
Keep students safe and in school by expanding restorative justice and 
alternatives to suspension. 
•
Expand whole-school restorative justice practices to reach all middle and high schools. Restorative
practices help students learn how to resolve conflicts, hold students accountable, and build and
heal relationships, and they correlate with improved academic outcomes, school climate, and staff-
student relationships.
•
Commit to a plan to eliminate disparities by race, disability, foster care status, and housing status in
school discipline and policing, and ensure schools consistently use other appropriate interventions
before excluding students from the classroom.
•
Prohibit school staff from contacting police, EMS, or ACS to respond to the vast majority of
student behavior, including emotional crises or distress. In 2024–25, NYPD was involved in 2,321
interventions in which a student in emotional distress was removed from class and sent to the
hospital for psychological evaluation; in 31 of those incidents, a child between the ages of seven
and twelve was handcuffed in the process.
- ► 

A DVO C AT E S  FO R  C H I L D R EN  OF  NE W  YO RK 
5 
Improve educational services, programs, opportunities, 
and outcomes for students with disabilities. 
Ensure there are enough special education teachers, service providers, and 
paraprofessionals to fulfill all students’ Individualized Education Program 
(IEP) mandates.  
During the 2024–25 school year, 11,900 K–12 students with disabilities did not fully receive their 
mandated special education instruction.  And as of May 2025, more than 600 children were waiting for 
seats in their legally mandated preschool special education classes and more than 7,100 preschoolers 
with IEPs were waiting for at least one of their legally mandated part-time services, like speech therapy 
or counseling, to begin. NYCPS should:  
•
Directly hire more staff to address chronic shortages in the system.
•
Increase payment rates for outside service providers (such as speech and occupational therapists),
on whom the City relies to fill gaps in the system but who are currently reimbursed at far below
market rate.
•
Fix the payment system to ensure providers are paid in a timely manner.
•
Extend the enhancements of the recent early childhood labor agreement to staff at preschool
special education programs so that teachers do not leave jobs where they are needed.
•
Develop incentives to recruit and retain special education teachers and providers in shortage areas
in high-need communities.
Continue to expand specialized programs and supports and develop new 
models to address instructional gaps, prioritizing underserved communities. 
•
Replicate and expand the grade levels served by existing specialized programs—such as ASD
NEST/Horizon and AIMS, which serve children with autism, and PATH, which serves students who
need intensive behavioral support—and develop new programs in areas of unmet need.
•
Create more short and long-term therapeutic school options and specialized programming within
NYCPS for young people with behavioral or emotional challenges, including students with
significant trauma histories, mental health challenges, or court involvement.
•
Build a corps of specialized staff who can be deployed to schools as needed so more students with
disabilities can learn in general education settings. Students should have access to specific clinical
services (for example, cognitive behavioral therapy), reading intervention, and other effective
individualized supports through the IEP process and should not be limited to the options that
happen to be available at their schools.
- ► 

A DVO C AT E S  FO R  C H I L D R EN  OF  NE W  YO RK 
6 
Ensure students with disabilities leave high school prepared for adult life. 
• Improve transition planning in the IEP process so that every high school student with a disability 
has a detailed plan to help prepare them for post-secondary life. 
• Ensure students with disabilities receive needed support to participate in Career and Technical 
Education programs, FutureReadyNYC, work-based learning opportunities, and career pathways 
programs. While these programs can play an important role in preparing students with disabilities 
for life after high school, students with disabilities face barriers getting the services and support 
they need to participate. 
• Expand access to travel training to ensure students with disabilities have the skills needed to 
navigate public transportation independently. 
Accelerate the timeline for increasing the number of fully accessible 
schools. 
Roughly two-thirds of New York City schools are not fully accessible to students, educators, and family 
members with physical disabilities. While the 2025–2029 Capital Plan includes $800 million for school 
accessibility projects, this allocation is insufficient given the magnitude of the challenge; at the current 
rate of progress, not even half of City schools will be fully accessible by 2030—four decades after the 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) was signed into law. 
Provide students with the make-up services they are owed as a result of 
remote learning during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Instead of continuing to fight families whose children missed out on essential services during the 
pandemic, the City should resolve the longstanding Z.Q. lawsuit to give students with disabilities the 
make-up services they need. 
Change the tenor of interaction with families to develop cooperative 
relationships instead of adversarial ones.  
The process of developing and implementing IEPs should be a true collaboration in which parents are 
treated as partners. NYCPS should be responsive to families’ concerns and make every effort to 
resolve issues quickly without the need for administrative hearings.  
 
 
- ► 

A DVO C AT E S  FO R  C H I L D R EN  OF  NE W  YO RK 
7 
Expand program options for English Language 
Learners and immigrant youth, recruit more bilingual 
teachers and service providers, and ensure Ells 
receive appropriate academic instruction and support. 
Establish the position of ELL Instructional Specialist to ensure English 
Language Learners (ELLs) receive appropriate academic instruction and 
support. 
While data show that multilingual students have the potential to outperform their peers when offered 
appropriate support, we too often encounter ELLs who are performing far below grade level in 
reading and math and who have never received the targeted language and academic instruction they 
need.  The City should pilot a program for schools with large numbers of ELLs to each hire an ELL 
Instructional Specialist, an educator who would be responsible for ensuring that all ELLs at their 
respective schools receive grade-level instruction in core subjects, have access to additional academic 
support where needed, are on track to pass to the next grade, and their parents feel welcome and 
engaged in their child’s education. 
Recruit more bilingual teachers and service providers. 
The City should explore all avenues for increasing the number of bilingual teachers and service 
providers working in NYC schools, including bilingual special education teachers. The City should 
create incentives to attract bilingual teachers to schools with shortages. 
Increase the number of dual language and transitional bilingual programs 
and place them in communities with large populations of ELLs. 
Research has found that ELLs educated in bilingual programs have better long-term academic 
outcomes than those who receive English-only instruction. However, four out of five ELLs in New York 
City received only English as a New Language (ENL) services in 2024–25 due to the shortage of dual 
language and transitional bilingual education programs. 
Expand high school options equipped to serve recently arrived immigrant 
youth ages 16–21. 
ELLs who arrive in the U.S. as teenagers have significant needs: in addition to having to learn a new 
language and meet graduation requirements before they turn 21, many of these students also have 
gaps in their education and require specialized academic support to access the curriculum; are juggling 
jobs and family obligations in addition to their schoolwork; and have complex social-emotional needs 
in part due to traumatic migration experiences. Unfortunately, there are currently few schools able to 
provide the intensive support these students typically need to be successful, and those that do exist 
are concentrated in Manhattan, far from where many immigrant youth live and work.   
- ► 

A DVO C AT E S  FO R  C H I L D R EN  OF  NE W  YO RK 
8 
Ensure highly mobile youth -
including students 
who are homeless, students in the foster system, and 
students in the juvenile or criminal legal system -
receive the support they need to succeed in school. 
Launch a bold interagency initiative led by City Hall to tackle educational 
barriers for students who are homeless.  
More than 154,000 New York City students—nearly one in every seven children enrolled in the public 
schools—experienced homelessness during the 2024–25 school year, the tenth consecutive year in 
which more than 100,000 students were identified as homeless. City Hall should set ambitious goals 
and oversee the implementation of plans to improve educational experiences and outcomes for 
students in temporary housing. The City should, for example, increase shelter placements closer to 
where children attend school to avoid long commutes and unnecessary school transfers; address 
persistently high rates of chronic absenteeism; and increase access to early childhood education 
programs. 
Appoint a Deputy Chancellor focused on the needs of students who are 
homeless and students in the foster system.  
Given the number of students who are homeless or in foster care and the unique needs and 
educational rights of these students, the City should appoint a high-level leader within NYCPS to help 
ensure these student populations receive the prioritization and attention they need and deserve.   
Continue the innovative work of the new Foster Care Office. 
In 2022, NYCPS took an important step forward by hiring a small team of staffers dedicated to 
supporting students in the foster system. The City should continue this work and expand upon existing 
professional learning opportunities, including by mandating training specific to students in foster care 
for school-based clinicians and administrators. 
Improve the education of young people in juvenile detention, juvenile 
placement, or adult jail and ensure that they transition back to appropriate 
placements in the community that provide them with opportunities to 
succeed.  
Given the unique and complex needs of students in and returning from juvenile detention, juvenile 
placement, or adult jail, the City must use existing data to identify gaps in the provision of appropriate 
education supports and develop targeted interventions to ensure students have access to a quality 
education while in and when returning from placement. 
- ► 

A DVO C AT E S  FO R  C H I L D R EN  OF  NE W  YO RK 
9 
Create a school transportation system that works 
for the students, families, and schools it is intended 
to serve. 
Overhaul bus contracts. 
Each year, hundreds of parents call AFC with problems related to transportation: their child has not 
been assigned a bus route and thus has no way to get to school; the bus route is extremely long 
despite their medical need for a shorter bus ride; the bus routinely arrives so late that the student 
misses their first class of the day; or the student wants to participate in an after-school program, but 
bus service is only available at 3pm. The City should advocate for the state-level changes necessary to 
rebid the contracts for school bus service—many of which are more than four decades old—and use 
the contract negotiation process as an opportunity to make major improvements, including providing 
more effective bus routes, extending bus service to after-school and summer programming, and 
enhancing customer service.  
Guarantee timely transportation for students in shelter and students in the 
foster system.  
When students enter the shelter system, are placed in foster care, move between shelters, or change 
foster homes, the City has a legal obligation to provide transportation so they can continue attending 
school without interruption. If bus service cannot begin right away, the City must provide viable 
alternative transportation options so students can get to school while waiting for bus service to start. 
- ► 

A DVO C AT E S  FO R  C H I L D R EN  OF  NE W  YO RK 
10 
Improve communication with families and prioritize 
building strong relationships between home and school. 
Increase access to translation and interpretation services and ensure that 
all families—including parents with limited English proficiency or low digital 
literacy—have access to the information they need to meaningfully 
participate in their child’s education. 
•
Ensure all family-facing communication takes into account families’ varying levels of literacy and
access to digital media. NYCPS should share information using local ethnic media, through
partnerships with community-based organizations (CBOs) in immigrant communities, and via hard
copy letters, text messages, and phone calls. Most communication between NYCPS and families
now occurs electronically, leaving many parents—especially those who have limited English
proficiency or are living in shelter—without timely access to information.
•
Fund translation and interpretation centrally within NYCPS to create efficiencies and help ensure
that a parent’s access to information is not dependent on the resources available at their individual
school. Currently, when families request translated documents from their child’s school beyond
general notices and letters, they are often told that the school does not have enough funding in
their budget.
•
Automatically translate special education documents for parents whose home language is a
language other than English, using the Office of Language Access’ centralized system. The burden 
should not be placed on families to ask for translation of each IEP or evaluation and on schools to
respond to each request.
•
Train schools in using NYCPS’ phone interpretation service to communicate with families who
speak a language other than English, including the importance of ensuring families know about and
are encouraged to communicate with school staff using this service.
Take proactive steps to create welcoming school environments and build 
trust with families.  
•
Set clear expectations for principals and provide guidance and coaching to all family-facing school
staff on effectively communicating across lines of racial, cultural, and linguistic difference. Invitations
for family involvement should emphasize collaboration and recognize that parents and caregivers—
not just school staff—are experts when it comes to their children.
•
Provide individualized assistance to help families understand their school options and navigate
application processes from 3-K through high school. We often work with families, including those
with low digital literacy or who speak a language other than English, who struggle to navigate
online application systems or do not feel they have meaningful choices.
- ► 

A DVO C AT E S  FO R  C H I L D R EN  OF  NE W  YO RK 
11 
Protect the safety and rights of undocumented 
students and families, LGBTQ+ youth, and other 
marginalized student populations. 
Maintain sanctuary city protections for undocumented students and 
families and safeguard sensitive student information.  
City schools should be safe havens for all students, regardless of immigration status. NYCPS must 
remain steadfast in its commitment to protecting all learners, including by refusing immigrant agents 
entry to school buildings or access to student records without a judicial warrant. NYCPS should also: 
•
Be prepared to quickly update and reissue guidance for schools in response to changes in federal
immigration policy.
•
Provide updated training, as needed, to superintendents, principals, School Safety Agents, Senior
Field Counsel, and Family Welcome Center staff to ensure they understand and can implement
NYCPS policy.
•
Ensure that community-based organizations (CBOs) that contract with the City to run early
childhood education programs, after-school activities, and other school-based programs receive
guidance, resources, and trainings on the rights of undocumented students and families similar to
those shared with schools.
Protect the rights of transgender, nonbinary, and intersex students and 
ensure schools are safe, supportive, and affirming environments for 
LGBTQ+ youth. 
NYCPS should maintain existing guidance on supporting transgender and gender expansive students, 
including the requirements that schools use a student’s chosen name and pronouns; provide students 
with access to facilities (e.g., restrooms and locker rooms) and opportunities (e.g., sports and school 
activities) consistent with their gender identity; and protect students from bullying, harassment, and 
discrimination. 
- ► 
