more 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
JOCELYN E. STRAUBER 
COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE Release #36-2025 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 17, 2025 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
    
DOI ISSUES REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO REMEDY GAPS IN CITY RETIREMENT SYSTEM’S INTERNAL 
CONTROLS BASED ON CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION OF PENSION THEFT BY FORMER NYCERS EMPLOYEE 
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Investigation (“DOI”), issued a Report today 
on the theft of pension funds managed by the New York City Retirement System (“NYCERS”), finding critical vulnerabilities 
in NYCERS’ internal controls, including  system access controls , verification procedures , and the failure to properly 
segregate sensitive tasks related to pensioners’ payments among different units and employees. This Report was prompted 
by a criminal investigation that resulted in the arrest and conviction of a now former NYCERS Associate Retirement Benefits 
Examiner who exploited internal control weaknesses and stole $624,000 from the accounts of two pensioners. That former 
employee was sentenced today to up to three years in prison. As part of this Report, DOI made 11  recommendations to 
strengthen NYCERS internal controls. A copy of the Report is attached to this release and can also be found here:  
https://www.nyc.gov/site/doi/newsroom/public-reports-current.page  
  
DOI Commissioner Jocelyn E. Strauber said, “ This Report details DOI’s investigation into pension fraud by a 
NYCERS’ employee who was sentenced to prison today for stealing $624,000 from two pensioners’ accounts. The 
investigation revealed that NYCERS needs to strengthen its internal controls , including its review of suspended accounts 
and employee training, and to implement additional security practices to detect and prevent fraud. I urge NYCERS to accept 
and implement the 11 recommendations DOI has made to protect the pension system, and I thank NYCERS for its  
cooperation with this investigation.” 
 
Between February 2021 and January 2024, Gregory Mathieu, an Associate Retirement Benefits Examiner at 
NYCERS, exploited internal control weaknesses to fraudulently divert approximately $624,000 in pension funds from two 
retirees' accounts. The fraudulent s cheme involved forged Electronic Fund Transfer (“EFT”) Authorizations, manipulated 
member profiles, and unauthorized reactivation of suspended pension accounts. DOI investigated this case with the Kings 
County District Attorney’s Office, which handled the prosecution. In April 2025, Mathieu pled guilty to Corrupting t he 
Government in the First Degree, a class B felon y, and agreed to a sentence of one to three years in prison, and to pay 
$511,115.61 in restitution. In addition, NYCERS was able to recover approximately $113,000 of the $624,000 in stolen 
funds from an account controlled by the defendant. Today, September 17, 2025, Mathieu was sentenced to up to three 
years in prison. The press release  on Mathieu’s sentencing can be found here:  
https://www.nyc.gov/site/doi/newsroom/press/2025/september.page  
 
This Report describes DOI’s findings with respect to Mathieu’s fraudulent diversion of pension funds and NYCERS’ 
internal control failures that arguably facilitated this conduct and allowed it to continue undetected, and makes 
recommendations for policy and procedural change to address these failures.  This Report also describes findings from 
several DOI investigatio ns regarding unauthorized pension account takeover, fraudulent NYCERS loan applications, and 
NYCERS’ remedial action in response to DOI’s prior recommendations intended to protect the pension system from theft 
and fraud. 
 
While NYCERS has implemented signi ficant security enhancements following Mathieu’s criminal conduct , 
continued vigilance and improvement of internal controls remain essential to prevent future fraudulent activities and to 
protect the pension assets of City employees. DOI recommends the following:  
 

2 
 
1. Internal Control Improvement   
a. Regular review of reactivated suspended accounts, especially those with monthly pension 
payments of $3,000 or higher.   
b. Periodic audit of retroactive payments and enhanced monitoring of returned payment pat terns. 
c. Regular assessment of access control effectiveness.  
 
2. Conduct periodic reviews of all accounts suspended for a period of 3 years to determine if members are 
still alive. This review should include contact with family members and review of local obituaries and probate 
court records. 
 
3. Bank account verification processes should be expanded to include EFT requests received via mail.  
 
4. Provide enhanced training for NYCERS employees including regular ethics training emphasizing personal 
responsibility in fraud prevention.  
 
5. Develop internal fraud algorithms based on risk indicators to: 
a. Alert staff to duplicate bank accounts or shared contact information across profiles.  
b. Alert staff to EFT requests to high-risk banks identified in previous fraud schemes. 
 
6. Maintain electronic audit logs for all account access and account changes, including who effectuates such 
changes.  
 
7. Require two-factor authentication (“2FA”) when members contact NYCERS to request account information 
changes.  
 
8. Notify member via email/SMS immediately upon a login to their account. Include details such as device 
type, browser, and IP location to help users recognize suspicious access.  
 
9. IP Monitoring: Review or block activity when a login occurs from a geographic region that is inconsistent 
with prior use (e.g., NYC login followed by overseas access; multiple logins from distant locations in short 
time).  
 
10. Secure Document Submission Portal  
a. Replace mail/email/fax submission of sensitive documents (e.g., EFT forms) with a secure upload 
portal with 2FA authentication. 
b. Use time-locked session links. By restricting the time a session is active,  the risk of unauthorized 
access is reduced. After a time- out, users need to re- enter credentials, adding an extra layer of 
security. 
11. Require identity confirmation by the relevant US Consulate followed by a NYCERS video call interview for 
all reactivation requests submitted by members residing overseas.    
  
Commissioner Strauber thanked NYCERS Acting Executive Director Elizabeth Reyes for her and her staff’s 
cooperation, in particular General Counsel Maya Khodos and Associate General Counsel & Privacy Officer Pamela Zable. 
 
The investigation was conducted by Confidential Investigator Farhana Begum with DOI’s Office of the Inspector 
General for NYCERS and was supervised by Assistant Inspector General Shakina Griff ith, Deputy Inspector General 
Aleksandro Tilka, Inspector General Ann Petterson,  Deputy Commissioner of Strategic Initiatives Christopher Ryan, and 
Deputy Commissioner/Chief of Investigations Dominick Zarrella.   
 
 
 
DOI is one of the oldest law-enforcement agencies in the country and New York City’s corruption watchdog. Investigations 
may involve any agency, officer, elected official or employee of the City, as well as those who do business with or receive benefits 
from the City. DOI’s strategy attacks corruption comprehensively through systemic investigations that lead to high-impact arrests, 
preventive internal controls and operational reforms that improve the way the City runs. 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
                     
 
 
 
             
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New York City 
Department of Investigation 
 
 
 
 
DOI Investigation of Theft 
Involving Pension Funds Managed by the 
NYC Employees’ Retirement System 
(NYCERS) and Related Recommendations 
 
 
 
 
     
    Jocelyn E. Strauber 
Commissioner 
 
Ann Petterson 
Inspector General for New York City Employees’ Retirement 
System 
 
         
September 2025 
 
 
 
  
NYCERS – Internal Controls September 17, 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 2 
 
 
Content 
I. Executive Summary ........................................................................................................................ 3 
II. Investigative Findings ..................................................................................................................... 4 
 A.   NYCERS Employee Gregory Mathieu’s Pension Fund Theft ............................................. 4 
 B.   Platform Conversion/Fraudulent Loans/Account Takeover ................................................ 8 
III. Conclusions and Recommendations .............................................................................................. 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NYCERS – Internal Controls September 17, 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 3 
 
 
I. Executive Summary 
 
The New York City Employees’ Retirement System (“NYCERS”) was established in 1920 
and is the largest municipal public employee retirement system in the United States , with more 
than 430,000 active members and retirees including civilian and uniformed employees. NYCERS 
is governed by a Board of Trustees  and is responsible for investing the assets of the retirement 
system, establishing the system’s administrative budget  and promulgating related rules and 
regulations. The NYCERS Board of Trustees consists of eleven members: a representative of the 
Mayor, the City Comptroller, the Public Advocate, the heads of the three unions with the largest 
number of participating employees, and the five Borough Presidents.1 
 
        The Department of Investigation’s (“DOI”) Office of the Inspector General for NYCERS, 
recently concluded an investigation of pension theft by a NYCERS employee. Between February 
2021 and January 2024, Gregory Mathieu, an Associate Retirement Benefits Examiner 2 assigned 
to NYCERS’ Pension Verification and R ecovery Unit (“PVARU”), exploited internal control 
weaknesses to fraudulently divert approximately $624,000 in pension funds from two retirees' 
accounts. The fraudulent scheme involved forged Electronic Fund Transfer (“EFT”) 
Authorizations, manipulated member profiles, and unauthorized reactivation of suspended pension 
accounts. DOI investigated this case with the Kings County District Attorney’s Office (“KCDA”), 
which handled the prosecution. Mathieu pled guilty to first-degree Corrupting The Government 
(NYS Penal Law §496.05)  and agreed to a sentence of one to three years in prison, and to pay 
$511,115.61 in restitution. In addition, NYCERS was able to recover approximately $113,000 of 
the $624,000 in stolen funds from an account controlled by the defendant. On September 17, 2025, 
Mathieu was sentenced to up to three years in prison. 
This case revealed critical vulnerabilities in NYCERS ’ internal controls, particularly 
regarding segregation of duties, system access controls, and verification procedures. Following the 
investigation, NYCERS implemented comprehensive reforms to address these vulnerabilities.  
This report describes DOI ’s findings with respect to Mathieu’s fraudulent diversion of 
pension funds and NYCERS’s internal control failures that arguably facilitated this conduct and 
allowed it to continue undetected, and makes recommendations for policy and procedural change 
to address these failures . This report also describes  findings from several DOI investigations 
regarding unauthorized pension account takeover , fraudulent NYCERS loan applications , and 
NYCERS’ remedial action in response to DOI’s recommendations. 
 
 
                                                           
1 https://www.nycers.org/about.  
2  Associate Retirement Benefits Examiner responsibilities include reviewing and calculating years of service, 
determining membership eligibility, and obtaining and updating beneficiary or pensioner information in the 
NYCERS system. 
NYCERS – Internal Controls September 17, 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 4 
 
 
 
II. Investigative Findings 
 
A. NYCERS Employee Gregory Mathieu’s Pension Fund Theft 
 
DOI’s recent investigation of pension fund theft by Mathieu demonstrates the critical need 
for improved internal control mechanisms at NYCERS, including segregation of duties to reduce 
the risk of theft by NYCERS’ employees. As described in detail below, Mathieu, an employee of 
NYCERS since 2009, used his familiarity with and access to NYCERS’ data and systems to divert 
two retirees’ pension funds to a bank account which he controlled. Mathieu stole approximately 
$624,000 in pension funds between February 8, 2021, and January 2, 2024.   
Mathieu’s scheme exploited the NYCERS’ pension suspension and reactivation process. 
NYCERS suspends pension payments when pension checks are returned to NYCERS (by the bank, 
US Postal Service, etc.) or when a pensioner fails to respond to a NYCERS’ inquiry to determine 
whether the pensioner is still alive and eligible for benefits. That inquiry is conducted by the 
PVARU, which is responsible for determining whether the pensioner is still eligible for payments, 
and, if so, reactivating the pension account . Among other things, the pensioner must complete a 
Payroll Verification Affidavit
3 (“PVA”) to reactivate the account. The suspension process, and the 
reactivation mechanism, are sound controls intended to avoid payment of pension checks to 
deceased pensioners. In 2012, DOI issued a report concerning fraud by third parties involving 
deceased beneficiaries and  issued a number of recommendations to ensure that deceased 
pensioners were removed from the pension payroll.
4  
NYCERS identifies a pension recipient as deceased or potentially -deceased through the 
following ways: a) n otification from the decedent’s family, friends, unions, or banks;  b) death 
match reports; and c) non-responsiveness to a PVA request. 
Each month, NYCERS compares suspended pension payment file s with data from the 
Social Security Death Master File to  determine if any pension members have passed away.  All 
members of PVARU have access to  the death match report. If the holder of a suspended pension 
account has not been reported deceased, and the account holder fails to respond to NYCERS’ PVA 
inquiry, the account can remain suspended indefinitely. If the account is subsequently reactivated, 
the account holder will receive retroactive benefits that were due during the suspension period. 
DOI’s review of NYCERS records identified systemic vulnerabilities that enabled Mathieu 
to manipulate NYCERS’ processes without detection. Mathieu first reactivated the pension of a 
deceased Department of Sanitation supervisor (“Pensioner A”), who died on January 8, 2018. 
Pensioner A’s death was not reported to NYCERS  and Pensioner A did not appear in the death 
match reports. After several of Pensioner A’s checks were returned to NYCERS, and Pensioner A 
did not respond to a PVA request in May 2018, NYCERS suspended Pensioner A’s account . 
                                                           
3 If NYCERS suspects that a pensioner is deceased, or once the pensioner reaches 85 years of age, the PVA is sent to 
the pensioner for them to complete, notarize, and return to NYCERS.  
4 https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2012/2012-05-09-Pr12pension.pdf 
NYCERS – Internal Controls September 17, 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 5 
 
 
Mathieu reactivated Pensioner A’s account in February 2021, stole retroactive payments of 
approximately $242,000,  and continued to receive Pensioner A’s reinstated monthly pension 
payments of approximately $5,700 until January 2024, when the scheme was detected. Mathieu 
also reactivated the suspended account of a retired Associated Railroad Signal Specialist employed 
by the MTA/NYC Transit Authority (“Pensioner B”). Pensioner B’s account was suspended in 
December 2019 because he failed to cash three of his pension checks and did not respond to a  
request to complete a PVA in August 2019. Mathieu reactivated Pensioner B’s account in October 
2023 and stole approximately $199,000. 
The scheme was revealed only when Pensioner B visited NYCERS in January 2024, 
seeking to reactivate his pension account and claiming he had not received payments since 2019. 
When NYCERS informed Pensioner B that his pension payments were electronically deposited, 
Pensioner B stated that he had no account at the specified bank. Petitioner B then filed a stolen 
identity report with the New York City Police Department (“NYPD”).  
 
NYPD identified Mathieu as the sole authorized user of a rented BMW that was captured 
on ATM machine surveillance footage during multiple cash withdrawals between October 2023 
and December 2023, from the account into which Pensioner B’s payments had been electronically 
deposited. In January 2024, NYPD referred the case to DOI  and shortly thereafter, NYCERS 
advised DOI of the alleged fraud and suspended Mathieu.  
 
DOI’s investigation of Mathieu revealed the fraud involving Pensioner A. In February 
2021, NYCERS received a handwr itten Form 380, Authorization for an EFT, purportedly from 
Pensioner A, including an address change. As a result of the EFT request, Pensioner A’s NYCERS 
account was reactivated. NYCERS calculated that Pensioner A  was entitled to retroactive 
payments of $225,432.80, to be paid in installments , beginning with a $99,999.99 payment in 
February 2021.
5  
On March 3, 2021, NYCERS Accounting and Banking Services (“ABS”) unit received 
notification that the $99,999.99 payment to Pensioner A was rejected due to a closed bank account. 
On that day, Mathieu created an online bank account at a different financial institution in the name 
of Pensioner A. The following day, an online MyNYCERS6 account was created under Pensioner 
A’s name, followed by a new EFT request through this account. NYCERS automated bank account 
verification validated the account as active and matching the pensioner’s name. After several failed 
attempts to deliver the replacement check, which was issued by the Comptroller’s Office on July 
21, 2021, Mathieu sent an email to NYCERS ABS directing th at the  check be cancelled and 
claiming Pensioner A requested an EFT.  
                                                           
5 Due to NYC Comptroller limitations, each individual payment may not exceed $100,000. 
6 MyNYCERS is an account management program which provides information and forms for employees and 
members to apply for membership, take out loans, sign up for direct deposit, change an address, and designate 
beneficiaries, among other actions. 
NYCERS – Internal Controls September 17, 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 6 
 
 
While this $99,999.99 payment was returned several times 7, a potential risk factor for 
fraud, NYCERS did not flag the account or otherwise subject it to additional scrutiny. DOI raised 
this issue with NYCERS, and banking operations have been modified to address this oversight. 
NYCERS now analyzes returned checks for potential fraud and requi res pensioners to verify in -
person or via live video that the account should be reactivated before NYCERS will produce a 
benefit check, especially for long-term suspensions.  
Regarding Pensioner B’s pension account, DOI learned that an EFT form for Pensioner B 
was date-stamped by the NYCERS mail room on October 11, 2023. Pensioner B did not request 
an EFT change and never mailed this form to NYCERS. DOI’s review of NYCERS mailroom 
surveillance footage shows Mathieu in the mailroom at the approxi mate time the form was 
received. DOI believes that Mathieu delivered the form to the mailroom and caused it to be date -
stamped so it would appear that it came from an outside source. In addition, the EFT form listed a 
Connecticut address, not the address listed in Pensioner B’s NYCERS profile, and bank account 
information that was the same as Pensioner A’s bank account information. These discrepancies, 
and the fact that same bank account was used for payments to two non-related pensioners, should 
have been detected by NYCERS as potential warning signs.  
NYCERS protocols also do not require account verifications for EFTs received by mai l. 
NYCERS explained that the automated bank verification step is performed for EFT changes  and 
online loan applications  filed via MyNYCERS . Therefore, Pensioner’s B bank account was 
updated without  validity of the bank account. As outlined in the conclusion section, DOI is 
recommending that NYCERS verify all bank accounts, including EFTs received by mail.   
A review of Mathieu’s work emails revealed that on October 17, 2023, Mathieu received 
an email from his personal email address , attaching a falsified bank statement in the name of 
Pensioner B. Subsequently, Mathieu sent an email to a NYCERS’ Pension Payroll employee with 
that bank statement and requested that Pensioner B’s EFT be processed for the October 2023 
pension payroll. The ABS unit, without conducting independent verifications, relied on Mathieu’s 
instruction and processed the request, updating Pensioner B’s payment method to direct the 
electronic deposit of funds into an account Mathieu controlled.   
During the course of this investigation, DOI conducted a forensic analysis of all NYCERS 
electronic devices assigned to Mathieu. DOI was informed that NYCERS did not maintain an audit 
trail of account access that would have shown when Mathieu accessed various NYCERS systems 
relating to the pension benefits.  
DOI’s investigation included a review of transaction records and internal communications 
to understand how Mathieu was able to circumvent the safeguards NYCERS had in place. In April 
and May 2025, DOI met with NYCERS executives to  discuss the findings of the Mathieu 
investigation and strategies to limit the risk of fraud on member accounts. As indicated above, 
Pensioner A and B’s accounts had been suspended for over three years and each had relatively 
                                                           
7 The USPS noted on the returned check that the address was “vacant.” The check was reissued to the same address.  
NYCERS – Internal Controls September 17, 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 7 
 
 
high monthly pension payments of $5,663 and $6,344, respectively. By targeting these particular 
accounts, Mathieu was able to generate and steal significant retroactive payments, over $640,000 
in total, including payments that NYCERS should not have been making in the first instance 
because Pensioner A was deceased. As a product of these meetings and many other discussions 
between DOI and NYCERS in the aftermath of Mathieu’s theft , NYCERS decided to restrict 
access to the suspended pensioner file to the PVARU supervisor, and to store the file in a locked 
folder. Because fraudulent EFT requests were made in connection with the reactivation of  
accounts of Pensioners A and B , NYCERS has changed its practices so that EFT requests no 
longer trigger an account reactivation automatically. Account reactivation now requires  
authorization from supervisors in both the PVARU and ABS units, a two-tier approval process.  
       The fraudulent EFT requests submitted by Mathieu included unauthorized changes to both 
mailing addresses and banking informa tion. To reduce the risk of this sort of fraud, NYCERS 
implemented procedures to verify changes to member account profiles. These new procedures 
require confirmation from the account holder with respect to existing contact information as well 
as any changes to that information. In the case of address change requests, NYCERS will initiate 
correspondence to both the address of record as well as the requested updated address. As 
mentioned earlier, NYCERS has established criteria which will mandate in person or  live video 
confirmation of reactivation request.  
          Because Mathieu may have used his access  to the mailroom to facilitate his fraud, 
NYCERS has restricted access to the mailroom to authorized mailroom staff.  
        Mathieu submitted a fraudulent EFT request for Pensioner B using bank information for 
the account he created for Pensioner A. While NYCERS noted that married NYCERS members 
may legitimately receive payments to joint accounts , at DOI ’s recommendation NYCERS has 
initiated alerts that flag common accounts for more than one member.      
DOI also addressed concerns regarding identity theft and NYCERS employee access to 
member profile information  with NYCERS senior staff . To mitigate insider threats, DOI 
recommended that NYCERS implement an auditing function so that NYCERS can track and retain 
data about access to member accounts.   
Lastly, DOI emphasized the importance of prompt notification by NYCERS to DOI of 
suspected fraud. Pensioner B reported to NYCERS  in person that he had not authorized any 
changes to his banking information and that he had not received any pension payments. NYCERS 
did not report this information to DOI. Immediate notification to DOI would have prompted an 
investigation that could have limited the extent of the fraud.   
In response, NYCERS recently implemented an Anti -Fraud and Anti-Corruption Policy 
to raise awareness by educating staff on the various tactics, techniques, procedures, and indicators 
of fraud and corruption. In addition, DOI is scheduled to present a series of anti -corruption 
presentations to NYCERS staff. NYCERS also has established an anonymous whistleblower 
hotline and reminded staff members of their obligation to report fraud to DOI. 
 
NYCERS – Internal Controls September 17, 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 8 
 
 
Mathieu’s case highlights the importance of robust internal controls, comprehensive fraud 
prevention training, and systematic oversight in pension administration. In the aftermath of 
Mathieu’s breach, NYCERS initiated the following improvements: 
• Imposing a two-tier level approval process for particular account activities  
• Increasing outreach to confirm pensioner status 
• Restricting access to suspended account data, date of death matching analysis , and the 
NYCERS’ mailroom  
• EFT requests will no longer automatically trigger account reactivation 
• Augmenting the returned check verification process 
• Mandating in person/remote video conferencing confirmation for account reactivation 
requests   
 
B. Platform Conversion/Fraudulent Loans/Account Takeover 
 
In 2020, NYCERS introduced a digital account management platform called  
“MyNYCERS”. With the launch of MyNYCERS, members are required to re -register their 
account information to establish an online account in the new system. Subsequently, in 
investigations distinct from the above-referenced Mathieu investigation, NYCERS and DOI found 
an increase in attempted fraud by unauthorized individuals accessing member accounts and 
altering member mailing addresses, email addresses, phone numbers and designated bank account 
information. In some instances, fraudulent loan requests resulted in the theft of funds from member 
accounts. Challenges brought by COVID-19, such as undelivered mail and suspension of in-person 
appointments, exacerbated the risk of fraudulent account takeovers and loan applications.  
 
Currently, NYCERS has 430,000 members; 190,017 are actively receiving City payroll , 
the remainder are retirees receiving pension benefit s. To date, more than half of NYCERS 
members have not re-registered on the MyNYCERS platform. I n June 2023, DOI recommended 
and NYCERS implemented a number of security measures to protect those individuals and reduce 
the risk that their accounts would be subject to theft or fraud. These  measures limit access  to 
NYCERS accounts by: a) IP addresses associated with previous fraud attempts; b) IP addresses 
used with five or more devices; d) multiple email addresses used by one device; and e) email 
addresses that are newly created and not associated with a single individual. Additionally, pursuant 
to DOI’s recommendation, members are now notified and asked to confirm any changes to their 
bank account information before such changes are made.  
 
In response to DOI recommendations, NYCERS  also has implemented several  security 
enhancements to improve the member verification process during account registration. NYCERS’ 
risk management service now uses additional risk scoring metrics to mitigate unauthorized account 
access. To protect sensitive internal processes  intended to mitigate fraud risk , s pecific details 
regarding the security enhancements NYCERS has implemented  are not discussed in this public 
report.  
NYCERS – Internal Controls September 17, 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 9 
 
 
DOI and NYCERS continue to collaborate on improvements to NYCERS’ internal 
controls. Continued vigilance and improvement of internal controls remains essential to prevent 
future fraudulent activities and protect the pension assets of city employees.  
   
III. Conclusions and Recommendations 
 
Mathieu’s case highlights the importance of robust internal controls, comprehensive fraud 
prevention training, and systematic oversight in pension administration.  While NYCERS has 
implemented significant security enhancements following this incident, continued vigilance and 
improvement of internal controls remain essential to prevent future fraudulent activities  and to 
protect the pension assets of city employees. To this end, DOI recommends the following:  
1. Internal Control Improvement   
a. Regular review of reactivated suspended accounts, especially those with monthly 
pension payments of $3,000 or higher.   
b. Periodic audit of retroactive payments  and enhanced monitoring of returned payment 
patterns. 
c. Regular assessment of access control effectiveness.  
2. Conduct periodic reviews of all accounts suspended for a period of 3 years to determine if 
members are still alive. This review should include contact with family members  and 
review of local obituaries and probate court records.  
3. Bank account verification processes should be expanded to include EFT requests received 
via mail.  
4. Provide e nhanced training for NYCERS employees including regular ethics training 
emphasizing personal responsibility in fraud prevention.  
5. Develop internal fraud algorithms based on risk indicators to: 
a. Alert staff to duplicate bank accounts or shared contact information across profiles. 
b. Alert staff to EFT requests to high-risk banks identified in previous fraud schemes. 
6. Maintain electronic audit logs for all account access and account changes, including who 
effectuates such changes.  
7. Require two-factor authentication (“2FA”) when members contact NYCERS to request 
account information changes.  
8. Notify member via email/SMS immediately upon a login to their account. Include details 
such as device type, browser, and IP location to help users recognize suspicious access.  
9. IP Monitoring: Review or block activity when a login occurs from a geographic region that 
is inconsistent with prior use (e.g., NYC login followed by overseas access; multiple logins 
from distant locations in short time).  
10. Secure Document Submission Portal  
a. Replace mail/email/fax submission of sensitive documents (e.g., EFT forms) with a 
secure upload portal with 2FA authentication. 
b. Use time-locked session links. By restricting the time a session is active, the risk of 
unauthorized access is reduced. After a time- out, users need to re -enter credentials, 
adding an extra layer of security.    
NYCERS – Internal Controls September 17, 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 10 
 
 
11. Require identity confirmation by the relevant US Consulate followed by a NYCERS 
video call interview for all reactivation requests submitted by members residing overseas.  