December 2024 
Research Report 
Building Teacher 
Capacity for 
Equitable CS: 
Insights from NYC’s CS4All Initiative 
By Cheri Fancsali, June Mark, and Janice Lee 
February 2025 

Steering Committee 
Acknowledgements 
This report is the result of the work and dedication 
of numerous individuals. We extend our gratitude 
to the entire CS4All evaluation team at the 
Research Alliance, including Kathy Hill, Xia Li, 
Rishika Jain, and Michelle Flores, for their tireless 
efforts in conducting the research and developing 
this report. Special thanks to Chelsea Farley, our 
communications director, for editing the report, and 
to Faith Northern and Summer Wildbill for their 
assistance with the final layout, production, and 
outreach process. 
We thank our partners at NYC Public Schools for 
their engagement with this research, with particular 
appreciation for Heather Wilson’s ongoing support. 
We are grateful to the entire CS Education team, 
especially Tunisia Mitchel and Christy Crawford. 
Their insights and collaboration have been 
invaluable to our research efforts and 
understanding of CS teacher capacity building. 
This study would not have been possible without 
the generous support of the Fund for Public 
Schools and the CS4All Founders Committee. We 
appreciate the time they dedicated to asking tough 
questions and providing feedback throughout the 
project. 
Finally, we are deeply indebted to the school 
leaders, teachers, and students who participated in 
our data collection efforts. Their responses 
provided essential on-the-ground perspectives, 
significantly enhancing our understanding of CS 
teacher capacity building in New York City. 
---------------------------------------------------- 
In addition to the funders of this specific study, the 
Research Alliance benefits from the support of the 
following organizations, who underwrite our 
capacity to engage stakeholders in our work and 
broadly communicate the results and implications 
of our studies: the Gates Foundation, Carnegie 
Corporation of New York, the Catherine and 
Joseph Aresty Foundation, New York University, 
the Wallace Foundation, and the William T. Grant 
Foundation. 
Our publications reflect the findings, 
interpretations, and conclusions of the Research 
Alliance and not necessarily those of our funders 
or individual Steering Committee members.  
Mark Dunetz, Chair 
President, New Visions for Public Schools 
Jennifer Jones Austin 
Chief Executive Officer & Executive Director, Federation of 
Protestant Welfare Agencies 
Melissa Aviles-Ramos 
Chancellor, New York City Public Schools 
Georgina Dopico 
Provost, New York University 
Frances Lucerna 
Co-Founder and Executive Director, El Puente 
Christine Mangino 
President, Queensborough Community College 
James Merriman 
Chief Executive Officer, New York City Charter School 
Center 
Michael Mulgrew 
President, United Federation of Teachers 
Félix Matos Rodriguez 
Chancellor, The City University of New York 
Henry Rubio 
President, Council of School Supervisors and 
Administrators 
Michelle Yanche 
Executive Director, Good Shepherd Services 
Leadership Team 
Cheri Fancsali 
Executive Director 
Kathryn Hill 
Research Director 
Chelsea Farley 
Communications Director 
About the Research Alliance 
Housed at NYU Steinhardt, the Research Alliance for 
New York City Schools is an independent, 
nonpartisan research center that conducts rigorous 
studies on topics that matter to the City’s public 
schools. We strive to advance excellence and equity 
in education by providing evidence about the policies 
and practices that promote students’ development 
and academic success. 

1 
Building Teacher Capacity for Equitable 
CS: Insights from NYC’s CS4All Initiative 
Executive Summary 
This brief examines the New York City Public Schools' (NYCPS) Computer Science for All 
(CS4All) initiative’s efforts to build teacher capacity and support the implementation of 
computer science (CS) education across K-12 classrooms. The initiative, launched in 2015, 
aimed to deliver high-quality CS education to all students by providing robust professional 
learning (PL) opportunities for teachers, including many with little or no prior CS 
background. 
Key Findings 
Professional Learning 
•
By 2024, more than 3,000 teachers had participated in CS4All PL sessions, with an
average of about 400 teachers trained annually.
•
Teachers rated the CS4All PL highly, with a majority responding favorably to
questions about the quality of the PL sessions. Most also reported that the PL
sessions increased their CS knowledge and skills, that what they learned would be
useful in the classroom, and that they were confident in their ability to provide CS
instruction.
CS Implementation 
•
Among teachers who remained in the classroom, over two thirds (68%)
implemented CS at some point following training (even if not immediately). On
average, 45 percent of teachers implemented CS instruction in the first year
following PL. Implementation rates ranged from a low of 20 percent of the teachers
who received PL in 2016 to a high of 69 percent in 2019. Implementation declined
year-over-year for each cohort of teachers, as time passed since their initial PL
participation. The lower implementation rates in the initiative's early years may be
partly attributed to less formalized and intensive PL offerings, as well as a lack of
explicit expectations for post-PL CS implementation.
•
Some of the gap between participation in PL and implementation of CS in the
classroom is explained by teacher attrition. One quarter of teachers participating in
PL (25%) between 2016 and 2023 left the system (22%) or moved into a leadership
or other non-classroom position (3%).
•
High school teachers and educators who participated in PL sessions for standalone
CS courses were more likely to implement CS than those at the elementary or
middle school levels and those who participated in PL sessions for integrating CS
into other subjects.
•
Implementing teachers tended to be in more advantaged schools than non- 
implementers. On average, implementing teachers’ schools served higher-income
and higher-achieving students, with lower proportions of Black and Latinx students.

2 
Barriers to Implementation 
•
Major barriers to implementation were structural in nature (i.e., factors often beyond
teachers' control). This included barriers related to time, such as scheduling
challenges, competing academic priorities, and lack of time to prepare lessons.
Further, a majority of non-implementing teachers were prevented from implementing
because their CS class was not scheduled or their teaching assignment changed.
•
In addition to structural challenges, teachers also reported facing normative barriers
to CS implementation (i.e., barriers related to school culture and attitudes toward
CS), albeit to a lesser degree. This included being hampered by a lack of priority for
CS instruction and inadequate administrative support. Lack of student enrollment or
interest in CS was not a significant barrier.
•
Barriers to implementing CS were particularly acute in schools serving students with
higher economic needs, exacerbating equity gaps in CS education.
•
Fewer teachers reported capacity issues—such as insufficient expertise in CS
content and pedagogy—as barriers to implementation. Non-implementers were
much more likely to report a lack of expertise in CS pedagogy and instructional
strategies than implementers.
Facilitators of Implementation 
•
Factors that facilitated implementation included having a professional community of
CS teachers, support from school leadership, and a strong school culture for CS.
Implications for Policy and Practice 
As NYC’s CS4All work evolves and CS education initiatives expand nationwide, the lessons 
highlighted in this report can inform planning and decision-making. Efforts to build teacher 
capacity and promote equitable access and participation goals may benefit from the 
following insights: 
1. Continuous professional learning and community building: Providing ongoing
PL opportunities, curriculum resources, and communities of practice for CS
teachers is critical to sustaining implementation and retaining qualified educators.
Consider evaluating which aspects of teacher support can effectively be delivered
through virtual or asynchronous methods as a cost-efficient way to reach more
teachers, while maintaining in-person support where it adds the most value.
2. Culturally responsive-sustaining education (CR-SE): Continuing to embed CR- 
SE practices in CS PL has the potential to improve instruction, student engagement,
and belongingness in CS for underrepresented groups. A deep focus on equity is an
essential part of the district’s efforts to address structural and systemic barriers to
CS and to promote the core goals of the CS4All initiative.
3. School leadership: Administrators play a crucial role in creating a vision for CS,
prioritizing instructional time, and navigating competing demands. Providing support
and resources for school leaders can facilitate planning for CS teacher capacity- 
building and equitable CS implementation.

4.
3 
Addressing structural barriers: Systemic solutions are needed to address staffing
shortages, scheduling constraints, and resource allocation challenges that hinder
CS implementation.
5. Aligning CS initiatives with district-wide priorities: It is important for
superintendents and executive superintendents to understand the benefits of CS
education and how CS fits in with other instructional priorities. This will help them
better support school leaders, including providing appropriate resources for
capacity-building efforts and CS implementation.
6. Building long-term capacity: While the initiative has made significant strides in
providing professional learning opportunities and support for current teachers, there
are several key areas where further action is needed to ensure a robust and
qualified CS teacher workforce in the years to come. Given the challenges of
teacher attrition, developing strategies to prepare and retain CS teachers is crucial
for program sustainability. Our findings suggest that developing high-quality teacher
PL tied to classroom-tested CS curriculum, CS teacher certification pathways,
incentives, and teacher and school supports can help build a sustainable pipeline of
qualified CS educators, especially as states consider making CS a graduation
requirement.

4 
Introduction 
The New York City Public Schools’ (NYCPS) Computer Science for All (CS4All) initiative is 
an ambitious public-private partnership designed to bring computer science (CS) education 
to every student in the district. Consistent with nationwide efforts, CS4All aims to expand 
students’ opportunities to participate in CS, including through career-connected learning. 
The ultimate goal of these efforts is to equip young people with skills needed for success in 
our technology-driven world, helping ensure their long-term economic security. 
Launched in 2015, the CS4All initiative was designed to deliver high-quality CS education 
to students within each grade band (i.e., K-2, 3-5, 6-8, 9-12). Accomplishing this hinged on 
the provision of professional learning (PL) in CS to large numbers of NYC teachers and 
school leaders, specifically targeting those with little or no CS background. Equity has been 
a core focus of the CS4All initiative, with teachers also receiving PL in culturally relevant 
and sustaining education (CR-SE) practices, as well as related instructional resources and 
support. From the outset, CS4Allplaced a strong emphasis on increasing access and 
exposure for groups who are historically underrepresented in CS, including girls, Black 
students, and Latinx students.  
This report examines the initiative’s efforts to prepare teachers to be CS educators, building 
critical capacity for CS education in NYC. Specifically, we examine teacher participation 
and retention in the initiative, aiming to better understand their implementation of CS in the 
classroom, as well as factors that either facilitated or hindered that implementation. Our 
findings shed light on why some teachers and schools have embraced CS4All while others 
faced obstacles they were unable to surmount. We outline a variety of implications for 
policy and practice, with a focus on strengthening future efforts to build teacher capacity for 
CS education. The report is organized into the following sections: (1) Data Sources and 
Methodology; (2) Teacher Participation in CS4All Professional Learning; (3) CS 
Implementation, (4) Contextual Factors Associated with Implementation; (5) Implementation 
Barriers and Supports; and (6) Discussion and Recommendations. 
1. Data Sources and Methodology
The data sources we draw on for this report include: 
•
Survey of teachers who participated in CS4All PL. Administered at the end of
the school year, the survey was designed to gather information about how teachers
were implementing what they learned in the CS PL, barriers to implementation,
additional supports needed to implement CS in the classroom, attitudes toward CS
(e.g., perceived value and usefulness), CS-related school culture, and adoption of
CR-SE practices and approaches. The survey included closed and open-ended
items. Data used for this report are primarily from the 2022 and 2023 teacher
surveys. In a few cases, we report findings from items that were only asked on
earlier surveys. (See the Appendix for sample and response rate information).
•
NYCPS’ Student Tracking and Registration System (STARS) data, which
provides a record of courses offered at all NYC schools. We used STARS data to
identify teachers who implemented CS in their classrooms.

•
Administrative record data on NYCPS students and teachers. This includes
school-level data on student demographic characteristics (e.g., race/ethnicity,
socioeconomic status, prior academic performance), as well as individual teacher
attributes (e.g., years of experience, school assignment) and PL participation
records.
•
A review of relevant documents, such as theories of change, PL materials (e.g.,
goals, objectives, agendas), and supporting resources provided to teachers and
administrators as part of the CS4All initiative.
5 
2. Teacher Participation in CS4All Professional Learning
Types of PL and Support Offered 
At the start of the initiative in 2015, there was a nationwide lack of teaching capacity for CS 
instruction, which persists today (CSTA, 2013; Shein, 2019). At that time, most states—
including New York 1—did not offer teaching licenses specific to CS. Further, very few 
schools in NYC offered CS instruction and courses, and those that did were predominantly 
highly competitive high schools that required a special test for admission. Consequently, 
the district faced the task of providing substantive professional learning experiences for 
large numbers of teachers with little or no background in CS. To facilitate this PL, the 
district developed the NYC CS4All Blueprint, a set of curriculum resources along with an 
implementation guide for teaching computer science in New York City public schools. The 
Blueprint delineates five fundamental CS concepts (abstraction, algorithms, programming, 
data, networks) and set of CS practices (analyzing, prototyping, communicating) that would 
be central to CS4All PL opportunities. PL opportunities were designed to help teachers 
develop their own knowledge of CS and to orient them around available resources for 
providing CS classroom instruction to their students.  
Each year, the initiative offered a diverse selection of PL programs (referred to as 
‘curriculum PL’ in this report) to teachers in foundational and advanced CS curricula, 
including summer and year-long learning activities. These PL experiences ranged from a 
minimum of 48 hours for foundational curriculum to over 100 hours for advanced 
curriculum. Different curriculum and PL options were available for each of the four grade 
bands that the initiative targeted (K–2, 3–5, 6–8, and 9–12). The curricular options included: 
•
CS units of instruction (such as Computer Science and Me, and CS is Problem
Solving) that can be integrated into other courses;
•
Standalone semester- and year-long CS courses (ranging from introductory CS to
Advanced Placement CS courses); and
•
Multi-year CS course sequences.
Integrated CS units were primarily implemented at the elementary level, while standalone 
and multi-year CS courses were primarily implemented at the middle and high school 
levels.  

The CS4All team provided teachers with PL that began in the summer prior to 
implementation and continued during the school year; they also facilitated ongoing teacher 
communities of practice. Over time, CS4All provided additional support to administrators 
and other school leaders, and CS teacher leaders. For example, teachers implementing 
units were initially supported by CS education managers—locally placed district staff who 
were often former CS teachers. This support later evolved to more specialized support for 
teachers by grade level rather than by location. The CS education managers (grades K–5) 
offered coaching and technical assistance, conducted site visits, and provided CS 
implementation planning guidance for teachers and schools. Similarly, at the middle and 
high school levels, site visits, coaching, and technical assistance were part of the support 
provided to schools. When the COVID pandemic started in March 2020, the site visits and 
on-site coaching across grades K–12 were replaced with virtual support (e.g., virtual office 
hours). In the 2023 school year, when both in-person and virtual support were available, 
most teachers opted to receive virtual support, and the CS4All team adjusted their support 
to be responsive to teacher needs. Post-COVID, CS4All teachers continue to receive 
extensive PL, implementation support, and guidance and resources to facilitate the 
implementation of CS instruction in their schools.  
6 
Teacher Perspectives on the Quality and Usefulness of PL 
Since early in the CS4All initiative, our evaluation has found that teachers rated the CS4All 
PL highly, with a majority responding favorably to questions about the quality of the PL. 
Teachers generally have reported that the goals of the PL were clearly stated, the activities 
were well organized and promoted learning, and the facilitators were knowledgeable and 
well prepared (Villavicencio et al., 2018).  Further, most teachers have said that the PL 
increased their CS knowledge and skills, that what they learned would be useful in the 
classroom, and that they were confident in their ability to implement CS instruction. For 
example, in 2019 (the most recent year our survey included questions about teachers’ 
confidence in implementing CS), about 72 percent agreed or strongly agreed with the 
statement “I understand CS concepts well enough to teach CS effectively,” and nearly 80 
percent agreed or strongly agreed that “I know how to facilitate students’ interests in CS” 
(see Figure 1 on the next page). These findings suggest that CS4All PL was preparing 
teachers well for implementation. The high ratings for both the usefulness and quality of the 
PL continued across the subsequent years of the CS4All PL. 
While teachers felt confident in their ability to provide CS instruction, some of them saw 
areas for growth in their own conceptual understanding of CS. For instance, 50 percent of 
the respondents agreed or strongly agreed with the statement “I wish I had a better 
understanding of the CS concepts I teach.” This sentiment is understandable given that 
most teachers entered CS4All without formal CS training or CS teaching backgrounds. 
While the CS4All curriculum PL provides a solid foundation, becoming a strong CS teacher 
capable of teaching multiple courses requires ongoing learning and development. This 
highlights the need for additional training and support beyond the first year of PL, allowing 
teachers to deepen their CS knowledge, expand their pedagogical skills, and stay current 
with rapidly evolving technology and curriculum standards. 

7 
Figure 1: Teachers’ Self-Reported CS Confidence 
Source: Research Alliance for NYC Schools 2019 CS4All Teacher Survey. 
Beginning in 2020, CS4All added Exploring Equity in Computer Science (EECS) PL 
sessions and events for teachers and school leaders. While a focus on equity and culturally 
responsive pedagogies are embedded in all CS4All PL, the EECS offerings were designed 
to enhance teachers’ understanding of CR-SE practices and support their integration and 
implementation across all of CS4All’s curricula. Building on the first session, EECS 
expanded in subsequent years to offer multiple, progressive levels of PL.2 Starting in 2021, 
teachers participating in the CS4All curriculum PL (i.e., PL designed to prepare teachers to 
implement integrated units, standalone courses, or multi-year CS course sequences) were 
also required to take a 90-minute foundational EECS course aimed at establishing shared 
language and best practices around equity, anti-racism (e.g., the meaning of institutional 
racism) and related practices.  
Similar to the curriculum PL, responses to the EECS PL have been generally positive, 
suggesting that it has led to greater implementation of CR-SE practices in CS classrooms, 
and greater teacher confidence in using these practices. Nearly all surveyed teachers 
(91%) reported that EECS PL supported the implementation of culturally relevant CS 
instruction to a large or moderate extent. Most teachers reported using their students’ 
knowledge and interests to make connections to new content in CS, modifying CS lessons 
to connect with students of different backgrounds and identities, and teaching CS lessons 
that affirm their students’ cultural and/or social identities (see Table 1 on the next page). In 
addition, in an open-ended question about impact, teachers reported that integrating CR-SE 
improved relationships with students, increased student interest and engagement, and 
helped students see the relevance of CS to their lives and identities. The introduction and 
delivery of equity PL have been an essential part of the district’s efforts to address 
structural and systemic barriers and to promote the core goals of the CS4All initiative. 

8 
Table 1: Teachers Implementing CR-SE Practices to a Moderate or Large Extent 
Percent 
CR-SE Practice 
78 
Using my students’ knowledge and interests to make connections to new content in CS. 
67 
Ensuring that a variety of diverse cultures, languages, orientations, and identities are 
reflected, represented and valued in my CS classroom. 
63 
Modifying CS lessons to connect with students of different racial/ethnic backgrounds or any 
other social identity. 
62 
Using inquiry-based or project-based CS learning. 
59 
Teaching CS lessons that affirm my students’ cultural and/or social identities. 
56 
Teaching lessons that allow my students to investigate issues of social justice in technology. 
Source: Research Alliance for NYC Schools 2022 and 2023 CS4All Teacher Survey. N=667. 
Characteristics of Teachers Participating in PL 
By the 2023-24 school year, over 3,100 teachers had participated in CS4All PL designed to 
prepare them to implement CS instruction in their classrooms. (See Table 2 for the total number 
of PL sessions teachers attended, the total count of teachers participating, and the unduplicated 
count of teachers participating each year). This includes PL focused on integrating CS units, 
standalone CS courses, EECS, and leadership PL. While most teachers (79%) completed one 
curriculum PL, 14 percent completed two, and 7 percent completed three or more. 
Table 2: Teachers Participating in CS4All Curriculum, Leadership, or EECS PL by Year 
School 
Year 
Total Number of PL 
Sessions Attended 
Count of Teachers 
Participating in PL  
Unduplicated Count of 
Participating Teachers 
2015-16 
408 
371 
371 
2016-17 
626 
567 
489 
2017-18 
508 
453 
298 
2018-19 
691 
623 
447 
2019-20 
683 
627 
393 
2020-21 
594 
563 
329 
2021-22 
519 
460 
283 
2022-23 
590 
505 
288 
2023-24 
562 
473 
235 
Total 
5181 
4642 
3133 
Source: Research Alliance calculations based on data provided by NYCPS. 
Note: Teachers from all districts, including special and alternative districts 75, 79, 84, and 88, are represented in these 
results. Teachers who enrolled in a PL offering but did not attend a majority of the scheduled hours of PL were not counted as 
a participant. Teachers may have attended multiple PLs within each year, and across years. The first column represents the 
number of sessions teachers attended by year, including teachers who attended multiple sessions in a year. The second 
column represents the duplicated count of teachers participating each year, including teachers who participated in multiple 
years. The third column represents a count of unique (unduplicated) teachers participating in PLs. If teachers attended PLs in 
multiple years, they were counted in the first year of participation. 

9 
As shown in Figure 2 below, more than half of curriculum PL participants were elementary 
school teachers. One fifth were middle school teachers, and another fifth were high school 
teachers. Three percent were ungraded special education teachers. Elementary teachers 
were more likely to be trained in teams (e.g., a whole school or grade level within a school), 
whereas middle and high school teachers more often participated in PL as individuals, often 
being the only CS teacher at their school. For example, 43 percent of high schools and 40 
percent of middle schools that participated in the CS4All PL had only one trained teacher in 
their building in the 2022-23 school year. In comparison, only 27 percent of elementary 
schools had only one trained teacher in their building. 
Figure 2: Distribution of PL Participants by Grade Level 
Source: Research Alliance calculations on data provided by NYCPS. 
Note: N=2,856. Only teachers participating in curriculum PL (i.e., PL focused on implementing integrated CS units, standalone 
courses, or multi-year sequence of courses) are included in this figure. In addition, 8 percent of teachers were missing grade 
level information and are not included in these data. A teacher is designated with a special education school level if they teach 
in a District 75 school.  
About two thirds of teachers participated in PL focused on curriculum that integrated CS 
units into other subjects (60%), a third (32%) participated in PL for standalone CS courses, 
and 17 percent participated in PL designed to prepare teachers to implement a sequence of 
courses comprising the Software Engineering Program (SEP). In addition to the curriculum 
PL, 171 unique teachers participated in CS4All’s equity PL between 2021 and 2024. Many 
of these teachers participated in multiple levels of EECS PL, reflecting the layered design of 
the PL. For example, teachers may start at level one—which focuses on building 
knowledge of racial and equity literacies and common language related to CR-SE, and then 
move to level two (with a focus on systemic characteristics of oppression in CS) and level 
three (where teachers begin to address institutional and systemic challenges in their 
context) in the following years. Some teachers take PL for multiple levels in the same year. 
At level four, the “ingenuity team”, graduates of levels one through three serve as advisors 
to CS4All, working with teachers and staff to support the equity-focused skills they have 
Elementary School, 
55.6% 
Middle School, 19.8% 
High School, 21 .9% 
Special Education, 2. 7% 

10 
gained (see the CS4All Equity Impact Report for more details on EECS PL). Table 3 shows 
the duplicated count of teachers participating in EECS PL, by level and year, highlighting 
growth in teacher participation over time.  
Table 3: EECS PL Participants, by Level and Year 
Level 
Number of Participating Teachers Each Year 
2021-22 
2022-23 
2023-24 
EECS Level 1 
40 
42 
63 
EECS Level 2 
26 
54 
EECS Level 3 
17 
10 
EECS Level 4 / Ingenuity Team 
11 
14 
38 
Total 
51 
99 
165 
Source: Research Alliance calculations based on data provided by NYCPS. 
Note: Teachers may have participated in multiple EECS levels. The numbers in this table 
represent duplicate counts of teachers who participated in multiple levels.  
Teacher Attrition 
Although the CS4All initiative reached a large number of teachers with PL opportunities, not 
all of these teachers remained in the classroom. Between 2015-16 and 2022-23, 22 percent 
of the teachers who participated in CS4All PL left the system, with the annual attrition rate 
of PL participants ranging from about 2 percent to 5 percent. In comparison, citywide 
attrition typically hovers around 6 percent per year; 8 percent of teachers districtwide left 
the system between 2021 and 2022 (the year hardest hit by the pandemic).3 The lower 
attrition among CS4All PL participants in comparison to citywide rates bodes well for 
sustainability of the initiative because it suggests fewer teachers are lost to natural turnover 
than expected. Nonetheless, 22 percent overall attrition still represents a significant loss of 
teachers who were trained to implement CS.  
In open-ended responses to our survey, several teachers described attrition and staffing 
shortages as undermining efforts to sustain CS in their school:  
My school desperately needs more CS teachers to teach integrated courses. We do 
not have them, and even if we did, there is no CS4ALL support for the next school 
year. I will be moving on next year, and I am afraid the program will not continue 
once I leave. – Elementary school teacher (2022) 
We previously had a team of eight teachers that implemented CS prior to COVID; 
since then teachers have either left the school or have changed assignments, 
making it difficult for them to implement CS. We now have a technology teacher who 
is working by herself, with no support to teach classes that she only sees once a 
week. – Elementary teacher (2022) 

11 
Another form of attrition is related to teachers moving out of classroom positions, in some 
cases as a result of promotions to leadership roles. We found that, among the 78 percent 
(2,211) of curriculum PL participants who were active in the school system in 2022-23, most 
remained in the classroom, with about 3 percent having transitioned to leadership positions 
(e.g., principal, assistant principal) or other non-classroom positions, such as social workers 
or guidance counselors, as shown in Figure 3. Moves to leadership positions ultimately may 
serve CS4All well, as principals and administrators who have participated in CS4All PL and 
taught CS are more likely to value CS education, understand the challenges to 
implementation, and know how to support CS efforts in their school. 
Figure 3: Status of All Curriculum PL Participants by 2022-23 
Source: Research Alliance calculations on data provided by NYCPS. 
Note: N=2,828 
3. CS Implementation
Most CS4All curriculum PL was held during the summer, with the intention of preparing 
teachers to begin implementing CS integrated units, courses, or sequences in their 
classroom in the coming school year. According to the STARS data, the percentage of 
teachers who implemented CS within the first year of PL participation varied year by year, 
ranging from a low of 20 percent in the first year, to a high of 69 percent in 2019, just before 
the pandemic (see Table 4 on the next page). Looking across years, on average, less than 
half (45%) of the teachers who participated in CS4All PL proceeded to implement CS in 
their classrooms within the first year. 
Remained in the 
classroom, 75% 
Moved to a non-classroom 
position, 0.7% 
left the system, 21.8% 
Moved to a leadership 
position, 2.5% 

12 
Table 4: Percentage of Teachers Who Implemented CS Within the First Year 
Year 
Number of PL Participants 
% Who Taught CS Within the First Year 
2015-16 
371 
20.0 
2016-17 
483 
31.7 
2017-18 
278 
43.2 
2018-19 
446 
69.3 
2019-20 
386 
61.1 
2020-21 
326 
50.6 
2021-22 
272 
44.1 
2022-23 
266 
40.6 
Total 
2,828 
45.4 
Source: Research Alliance calculations based on data provided by NYCPS. 
Note: Table shows the percentage of teachers who implemented CS the school year during which they participated in the PL, 
or if they participated in the summer, the immediately following school year. The percentage is calculated out of the number of 
new PL participants in that year, according to our data.  
Of the 2,828 teachers who had participated in PL by the 2022-23 school year (the latest 
year of available implementation data), we found that more than half (51%) implemented 
CS for at least one year after their training, but only 14 percent of teachers implemented 
and continued to implement every year after participating in the PL (see Figure 4 on the 
next page). As noted earlier, a small percentage (3%) moved to a leadership or non- 
classroom position, and 22 percent left the system altogether. Among those teachers who 
remained in the classroom, over two thirds (68%) implemented CS for at least one year 
following the PL.  
These findings highlight two patterns: 1) implementation was not always consistent, with 
some teachers starting and stopping from year to year, and 2) some teachers eventually 
implemented CS in their classes, even if they were unable to do so immediately after the 
PL. Not unexpectedly, implementation declined year-over-year for each cohort as they got 
further away from the year in which they first participated in the PL.  
The gap between PL participation and implementing CS in the classroom may be attributed 
to several factors. Attrition is one major contributor: As noted above, 22 percent of PL 
participants had left the NYC school system by the 2022-23 school year. Teacher mobility is 
another factor that affects implementation. Overall, 16 percent of teachers who participated 
in the CS4All PL subsequently moved to a different school. However, mobility rates for 
teachers varied substantially by implementation, with teachers who implemented every year 
after training just one fourth as likely to have changed or moved schools by 2022-23 as 
teachers who implemented in some or no years (4% vs. 19% and 17% respectively). This 
suggests that teachers’ assignments may have been different in their new schools, that the 
new school may have already had CS teachers and didn’t need additional staff, or that CS 
was not a priority for the new school and thus not offered.  

13 
Figure 4: How Many PL Participants Had Implemented CS by 2022-23? 
Source: Research Alliance calculations on data provided by NYCPS. 
Note: N=2,828. 
It is also possible that some teachers and schools that participated in the PL were 
interested in exploring CS education but were not yet prepared to offer CS courses to 
students. In the early years of the initiative (2015-16 through 2017-18), the PL program was 
still in development, and there was not a consistent expectation that teachers who were 
trained needed to have a plan for implementation in the school year immediately following 
the PL. These teachers may have attended the PL to gather information and assess the 
potential for future CS integration. Additionally, teachers who completed the PL might have 
felt the need to further develop their own CS knowledge, confidence, and competence 
before introducing it in their classrooms. This desire for additional preparation time and the 
lack of a clear expectation of classroom implementation could have delayed the 
implementation of CS instruction, even among educators who were enthusiastic about the 
subject. 
Finally, since STARS data are typically reported by school administrative staff (rather than 
teachers themselves) there may be some underreporting of implementation, especially for 
classes where CS is integrated into other subjects. Our earlier research found this to be the 
case.4 However, underreporting is not likely to fully account for the discrepancy between 
teachers participating in CS4All PL and their subsequent implementation. In the next 
section, we explore some contextual factors that may be shaping teachers’ ability to 
implement CS in the classroom.  
Moved to a non-classroom 
position, 0.7% 
Implemented CS in all years, 
14.1% 
Implemented CS in some 
years, 36. 7% 
Moved to a leadership position, 2.5% 
Left the system, 21.8% 
Did not implement CS, 24.2% 

4. Contextual Factors Associated with Implementation 
14 
Among those teachers who participated in the CS4All PL and were still active in the 
classroom, we found key differences between those who implemented CS and those who 
did not. These differences—related to both the types of PL teachers participated in and 
their school level—provide insight into conditions that may support implementation. 
Specifically, we found implementation to be associated with the following factors. 
Participants in Standalone Course PL Were More Likely to Implement CS 
Teachers who participated in PL on standalone courses were more likely to implement CS 
in their classrooms, compared with teachers who participated in PL for integrating CS units 
into other subjects. Table 5 shows that 21 percent of course-trained teachers implemented 
CS in all years since their training, while only 12 percent of unit-trained and 13 percent of 
sequence-trained teachers did so. Teachers who participated in unit training were the most 
likely to say they never implemented CS in the classroom. 
Table 5: Likelihood of Implementing CS by Type of Curriculum PL Attended 
Unit PL Course PL Sequence PL 
% Implemented All Years 
12.2 
20.5 
13.0 
% Implemented Some Years 
47.8 
52.8 
65.2 
% Did Not Implement 
40.0 
26.7 
21.8 
Source: Research Alliance calculations on data provided by NYCPS. 
Note: Implementation status and PL participation are calculated using data as of the 2022-23 school year. 
Several factors contribute to this trend. First, teachers integrating CS units into other 
subjects were more likely to report challenges related to finding space for CS within the 
curriculum, compared with those teaching a standalone class devoted to CS. Additionally, 
schools often send multiple teachers to the unit-focused PL, with the expectation that only 
one or two teachers in the school will ultimately teach the CS unit. In contrast, schools that 
send teachers to participate in PL for standalone courses or sequences (e.g., SEP or 
SEPjr) often have the course already planned, increasing the likelihood that the attending 
teacher will in fact teach the course. Relatedly, as described below, we found that 
implementation varied by grade level.   
Middle School Teachers Were Least Likely to Implement CS 
As shown in Table 6 on the next page, 43 percent of trained middle school teachers did not 
implement CS, compared with 31 percent of elementary school teachers and 29 percent of 
high school teachers. This aligns with previous findings showing that middle schools are 
less likely to offer CS to their students.5 It is important to highlight this discrepancy because 
middle school is when gender and race/ethnicity disparities in students’ interest and 
engagement in science and technology typically begin to reveal themselves and widen 
(Potvin & Hasni, 2014). 

15 
High School Teachers Were Most Likely to Implement CS 
High school teachers are predominantly implementing standalone CS courses that are 
likely already part of their school’s scheduled curricular offerings. This means teachers’ 
efforts may be less likely to be sidelined by the class not being scheduled, competing 
demands, or lack of instructional time. 
Table 6: Likelihood of Implementing CS by Grade Level 
Elementary 
School
Middle 
School 
High 
School 
Special 
Education 
% Implemented All 
Years 
15.9 
8.9 
22.1 
0.0 
% Implemented Some 
Years 
53.5 
48.7 
48.8 
49.1 
% Did Not Implement 
30.6 
42.5 
29.1 
50.9 
Source: Research Alliance calculations based on data provided by NYCPS. 
Note: Implementation status and school level were calculated using data as of the 2022-23 school year. Teachers were 
designated with a special education school level if they were teaching in a District 75 school. 
Implementation Also Varied by School Demographics 
Additionally, we found differences in the likelihood of implementing that were related to the 
composition of students in a teacher’s school (see Table 7 on the next page). Specifically, 
using school-level data from the 2021-22 school year, we found that:  
•
Implementing teachers tended to be in more economically advantaged schools, as
measured by a lower average Economic Need Index (ENI).6
•
Implementing teachers tended to be in schools serving lower proportions of Black
and Latinx students.
•
Implementers were in schools that served a somewhat lower percentage of English
language learners and students with Individualized Education Programs (IEPs) on
average.
•
Implementers tended to be in schools with higher proportions of students who are
proficient on the NY State standardized tests in mathematics and, to a smaller
extent, English.
These findings, when considered collectively, indicate that teachers in relatively more 
advantaged schools were more likely to implement CS. This disparity may stem from the 
fact that schools with lower implementation rates often face numerous challenges and 
competing priorities. For instance, the pressure to focus on standardized test preparation 
may make it more difficult for these schools to successfully introduce and maintain CS 
programs. 

16 
Table 7: Average School-Level Characteristics for Each Implementation Category 
Implemented All 
Years 
Implemented Some 
Years 
Did Not 
Implement 
Average Economic Need Index 
71.8 
72.6 
76.8 
% Black and Latinx Students 
65.8 
66.6 
72.2 
% English Learners 
15.2 
16.9 
17.1 
% Students With an IEP 
20.3 
21.4 
23.1 
% Students Proficient in 
English on NY State Exam 
44.9 
44.4 
42.1 
% Students Proficient in Math 
on NY State Exam 
38.9 
36.4 
32.3 
Source: Research Alliance calculations based on data provided by NYCPS. 
Note: School-level characteristics are calculated using data from the 2021-22 school year. 
5. Implementation Barriers and Supports
Our analysis of teacher survey data identified three primary categories of barriers that 
teachers faced when implementing CS after CS4All PL: structural, normative, and individual 
capacity barriers. Structural barriers are systemic factors often beyond teachers' control, 
such as insufficient instructional and preparation time, competing demands, and resource 
limitations. Normative barriers relate to school culture and attitudes toward CS, including 
perceptions of its importance and levels of administrative support. Capacity barriers involve 
teachers' individual knowledge, skills, and confidence in delivering CS instruction. 
In the following sections, we present findings on each barrier type, drawing on survey data 
from implementing and non-implementing teachers. We explore how these barriers 
manifested across various school contexts and discuss their implications. We then turn to 
an examination of factors that supported successful CS implementation. 
Structural Barriers to Implementation 
Findings from our teacher surveys revealed several interconnected structural barriers to CS 
implementation (see Table 8 on the next page). Both teachers who implemented CS and 
those who did not identified challenges primarily revolving around time constraints and 
competing priorities. This included: 1) insufficient instructional time, 2) pressure to adhere to 
the pacing guide schedule, and 3) inadequate preparation time. To a lesser extent, 
teachers also cited a lack of materials as an obstacle. Notably, non-implementing teachers 
perceived structural challenges as more significant barriers compared to their counterparts 
who did implement CS instruction. This suggests that overcoming these obstacles may be a 
crucial factor in determining whether teachers successfully implement CS into their 
classrooms. 

17 
When asked to elaborate about these barriers, many teachers (especially at the elementary 
level) pointed to the need to cover other content, such as the mathematics curriculum or 
new science standards, or the need to prepare for standardized tests, as illustrated by the 
quotes below. 
“The biggest challenge is finding time to teach CS amongst the requirements to 
teach other subjects and prepare for state testing.” - Elementary Teacher (2023) 
“This school has just become a Title One school, which means there are lots of 
activities which are included along with academics so I feel like there is not enough 
time.”  - Elementary Teacher (2023) 
“The focus is on literacy and math leaving little to no time for CS. The schedule 
given allows tech teachers time but not a classroom teacher. The amount of 
assessment required leaves little time for CS.”  - Elementary Teacher (2023) 
“Lack of time to incorporate CS into the curriculum is a HUGE challenge.” - 
Elementary Teacher (2022)  
“The biggest challenge is time to implement and remain consistent with lessons.” - 
Elementary Teacher (2023) 
“My science curriculum changed to meet NGSS [Next Generation Science 
Standards] standards, and the curriculum is too large to complete in a single school 
year. There is no time for CS…” - Middle School Teacher (2022) 
“Generally speaking, our school focuses on the most urgent graduation needs first 
(credits and Regents) before being concerned with CS coursework and AP courses. 
Many of our students struggle to meet those initial requirements, and our school 
prioritizes those over CS. Because we don't have CS classes, we also don't have 
qualified CS teachers beyond the current two.” - High School Teacher (2023) 
Table 8: Structural Challenges by Implementation Status 
Challenge 
% Reporting Challenge to a Moderate or Large Extent 
Implementers (N=667) 
Non-Implementers (N=153) 
Lack of instructional time to implement. 
44.5 
57.4 
Keeping up with the pacing guide schedule. 
40.9 
60.0 
Lack of preparation time. 
37.6 
38.9 
Lack of curricular materials. 
20.6 
28.5 
Source: 2022 and 2023 CS4All Teacher Survey. 

Further exploration of school-level barriers revealed significant structural and organizational 
challenges, particularly for non-implementing teachers (see Table 9 below). Two key factors 
emerged as primary obstacles: 
1. Scheduling conflicts: Two thirds of non-implementing teachers (66%) reported
that they couldn't implement CS because the class was not scheduled.
2. Changes in teaching assignments: Nearly as many (65% of non-implementing
teachers) cited shifts in their teaching responsibilities as a barrier.
As one high school teacher in 2022 noted, “The school could not fit it into the schedule, 
even though CS is supposedly a focus area in NYCDOE...” About one third of non- 
implementing teachers indicated staffing shortages were a barrier, and in 2022, disruptions 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic were identified as a substantial obstacle to implementation. 
While less prevalent, technology-related barriers also played a role. Some non- 
implementing teachers reported a lack of working devices for students, though to a much 
smaller extent than the scheduling and assignment issues. These findings highlight the 
complex interplay of factors that can impede CS implementation, even when teachers are 
prepared and willing to teach the subject. 
18 
Table 9: Structural Challenges Faced by Non-Implementing Teachers 
Challenge 
% Reporting Challenge to a Moderate or Large Extent 
CS classes were not scheduled. 
65.6 
Teaching assignment changed. 
65.3 
Disruptions due to the COVID-19 
pandemic.* 
58.5 
School has a staffing shortage.** 
31.3 
Not enough working devices for my 
students.**  
22.9 
Source: 2022 and 2023 CS4All Teacher Survey.  
Note: * indicates item was only asked on 2022 survey; ** indicates the item was only asked on the 2023 survey. 
Not surprisingly, implementing teachers were less likely to report challenges that limited 
their school’s ability to offer CS, although some of them highlighted issues that echoed 
things we heard from non-implementing teachers. When asked about barriers, 
implementing teachers most frequently reported that students lacked time in their schedules 
to take CS, followed by a need to prepare students for high-stakes tests (potentially at the 
expense of CS instruction), and a shortage of qualified CS teachers. These findings, 
detailed in Table 10 on the next page, highlight systemic challenges that persist even when 
teachers are actively implementing CS instruction—suggesting that successful CS 
implementation requires addressing both individual teacher preparedness and broader 
institutional factors. 

19 
Table 10: Structural Challenges Faced by Implementing Teachers 
Challenge 
% Reporting Challenge to a Moderate or Large Extent 
Lack of time in student schedules. 
40.0 
Need to prepare students for high-stakes 
tests.  
38.2 
Lack of qualified CS teachers. 
32.5 
Competing priorities. 
28.7 
Lack of internet access. 
8.9 
Source: 2022 and 2023 CS4All Teacher Survey. 
Normative Barriers to Implementation 
In addition to structural challenges, teachers also reported facing normative barriers to CS 
implementation, albeit to a lesser degree (see Table 11 below). These barriers, reflecting 
the perceived value and support for CS within schools, were more pronounced among non- 
implementing teachers. Specifically, over one third of implementing teachers and fully half 
of non-implementers were hampered by a lack of priority for CS instruction, and a 
substantial portion reported lack of administrative support as a challenge to a moderate or 
large extent (20% of implementers and 37% of non-implementers). Interestingly, lack of 
student enrollment or interest in CS was not a substantial barrier for most, reported by only 
12 percent of implementing teachers and 11 percent of non-implementing teachers. These 
findings suggest that while school-wide priorities and support play a crucial role in CS 
implementation, student enthusiasm for CS is generally not a major obstacle. The 
disparities between implementing and non-implementing teachers highlights how school 
practices and administrative backing can significantly influence CS implementation efforts. 
Table 11: Normative Challenges by Implementation Status 
Challenge 
% Reporting Challenge to a Moderate or Large Extent 
Implementers (N=667) 
Non-Implementers (N=153) 
Lack of priority for CS instruction (e.g., 
class gets bumped for school events, etc.)* 
36.6 
50.0 
Lack of administrative support. 
20.1 
37.4 
Lack of student enrollment/interest.** 
12.3 
11.4  
Source: 2022 and 2023 CS4All Teacher Survey.  
Notes: * indicates the question was only asked in 2023. ** indicates only implementers answered this question in 2022. 
Teacher Capacity Barriers to Implementation 
Teachers reported fewer individual capacity-related barriers compared to structural or 
normative challenges. However, there were some notable differences between 
implementing and non-implementing teachers (see Table 12 on the next page.) Among 
implementing teachers, the most significant capacity-related barrier was a lack of expertise 

20 
in coding using a programming language, with 26 percent reporting this as a moderate to 
large challenge. This was followed by a lack of expertise in computer science education 
pedagogy (22%) and computer science content (21%). Non-implementing teachers, 
however, reported higher levels of capacity-related barriers across all categories. The most 
prominent challenge for this group was a lack of expertise in computer science education 
pedagogy, with 42 percent citing this as a moderate to large barrier. This was closely 
followed by a lack of expertise in coding and computer science content (36% each). These 
findings suggest that while individual capacity-related barriers are not the most prevalent 
challenges overall, they play a more substantial role for teachers who have not yet 
implemented CS in their classrooms.  
Table 12: Individual Capacity-Related Barriers by Implementation Status 
Barrier 
% Reporting Barriers to a Moderate or Large Extent 
Implementers (N=667) 
Non-implementers (N=153) 
Lack of expertise in computer 
science content. 
21.2 
36.0 
Lack of expertise in coding using a 
programming language. 
26.2 
36.3 
Lack of expertise in computer 
science education pedagogy and 
instructional strategies. 
22.0 
42.1 
Source: 2022 and 2023 CS4All Teacher Survey. 
It may be that some teachers require additional learning opportunities in order to feel 
confident in their ability to implement CS. When asked in an open-ended question about the 
support they would need, one teacher told us:  
"I think more PD…—I really think that that's just the key. The teachers, for this year, 
they were able just to get their feet wet, and they have the passion, and they want to 
do it… I also think that the PD [has] to be tailored to their needs, it can't be general. 
– Elementary teacher (2022)
Some elementary level teachers also highlighted a need for more capacity in terms of 
integrating CS into their instruction: 
“[I need more] help with implementing lessons and strategies into our DOE core 
curriculum”  - Elementary teacher (2022) 
This last comment highlights a common theme in our data regarding how challenging some 
teachers found it to integrate CS into other subjects.  

21 
Differences in Barriers by School Characteristics 
Barriers to implementing CS seemed to be particularly significant for teachers in higher- 
need schools. Specifically, we found that teachers in schools with higher Economic Need 
Index scores—a measure of poverty—consistently reported higher levels of agreement with 
statements about challenges to implementation, compared to those in schools with lower 
ENI scores. As shown in Table 13, among non-implementing teachers, those in higher 
economic need schools were almost three times as likely to report that their CS classes 
were not scheduled (73% versus 23%), and more than twice as likely to say they lacked 
administrative support (40% vs. 15%). A much larger proportion of non-implementing 
teachers in high-need schools also reported that their teaching assignment changed (70% 
vs 39%). While the sample size of non-implementing teachers in low economic need 
schools is small (n=16), which calls for cautious interpretation, the results nonetheless 
suggest a potentially notable trend. 
Table 13: Challenges Reported by Non-Implementing Teachers, by School ENI 
Challenge 
% Reporting Challenge to a Moderate or Large Extent 
Low ENI (N=16) 
High ENI (N=117) 
CS classes were not scheduled. 
23.1 
72.9 
Teaching assignment changed. 
38.5 
69.5 
Lack of administrative support. 
15.4 
40.4 
Source: 2022 and 2023 CS4All Teacher Survey. 
Note: A school is categorized as “High ENI” if it has an ENI of greater than 0.6 (out of 1.0 total), indicating 60% or more of its 
students are in poverty. NYCPS considers schools with an index of .6 or higher to be high-poverty schools.   
Even among implementing teachers, there was a pattern of those in high-need schools 
reporting challenges to a greater extent than those in low-need schools. Among the largest 
differences were the percentage challenged by the need to prepare students for high- 
stakes tests and the lack of qualified CS teachers (see Table 14). 
Table 14: Challenges Reported by Implementing Teachers, by School ENI 
Challenge 
% Reporting Challenge to a Moderate or Large Extent 
Low ENI (N=112) 
High ENI (N=497) 
Lack of time in student schedules. 
34.9 
40.7 
Need to prepare students for high -
stakes tests.  
28.6 
40.4 
Lack of qualified CS teachers. 
24.8 
34.2 
Competing priorities. 
25.3 
30.6 
Lack of administrative support. 
14.2 
21.3 
Lack of student enrollment/interest. 
8.6 
12.9 
Lack of internet access. 
7.5 
9.7 
Source: 2022 and 2023 CS4All Teacher Survey. 

Supports for CS Implementation 
22 
While our analyses have highlighted various barriers to CS implementation, it is equally 
important to understand the factors that have facilitated successful implementation. Our 
research identified a variety of key supports that were more prevalent among teachers who 
successfully implemented CS in their classrooms. These supports fall into three main 
categories: professional community, leadership capacity, and school culture.  
•
More professional community: As shown in Table 15, implementers were
somewhat more likely to be in schools with other teachers who participated in
CS4All PL, and therefore had a larger professional community with whom they
could share lessons, curriculum, and materials. It makes sense that having a
professional community of CS educators, within the same building, could provide
valuable support for CS implementation.
•
Greater leadership capacity: Implementers were more likely to have teacher
leaders or school leaders who participated in CS4All leadership PL, which focuses
on developing a schoolwide vision for CS and an implementation plan that can
address many of the barriers teachers face. Lack of engagement from leadership,
especially in schools that do not have a strong professional community of CS
teachers, makes it more difficult to build schoolwide buy-in for CS education, as
noted by one teacher on our survey:
“[Our] administration takes no interest in computer science. It is not a core subject 
so students do not take it seriously either. All of these challenges make it that much 
more difficult to teach CS.” – Middle school teacher (2022)  
•
Stronger CS culture: A strong school culture for CS was also associated with
implementation. For example, implementers were much more likely to agree that
increasing CS participation is a priority for their school (45% vs 16%) and that
teachers and counselors think it is important to offer CS (45% vs. 26%). At the same
time, as noted earlier, they were less likely to agree that implementation was
stymied by lack of administrator support (20% vs. 37%) or a lack of priority for the
school (37% vs. 50%), compared with non-implementers (see Table 11 above).
Table 15: School-Level CS Capacity by Implementation Category 
Implemented All 
Years 
Implemented Some 
Years 
Did Not 
Implement 
% Had More than One 
Trained Teacher 
87.8 
87.3 
83.3 
% Had a Teacher Leader 
45.1 
41.5 
23.9 
% Had an Admin Attend PL 
68.1 
66.5 
55.1 
Source: Research Alliance calculations on data provided by NYCPS. 
Note: Implementation status is calculated using data as of the 2022-23 school year, while school-level PL participation 
variables are calculated using data up to the 2022-23 school year. 

23 
6. Discussion and Recommendations
Findings from our surveys, participation and implementation data across multiple years of 
the initiative point to several promising strategies for engaging and supporting teachers as 
CS educators and building sustainable CS programs. As discussed in more depth below, 
these include:  
•
Providing support for school leaders to plan for effective and equitable CS
instruction.
•
Addressing structural barriers to implementation.
•
Supporting ongoing teacher professional learning and community building.
•
Embedding culturally responsive-sustaining education (CR-SE) practices in CS.
•
Building longer-term teacher capacity and sustainability.
Providing Support for School Leaders to Plan for Effective and Equitable CS 
Instruction 
Our findings show that administrator support is critical for CS implementation and teacher 
retention. These leaders play a key role in planning for CS implementation, championing a 
vision for CS, building a strong CS culture in the school, and prioritizing instructional and 
planning time for CS teachers. Having a CS teacher leader is also associated with stronger 
implementation of CS within a school. Increased buy-in and support from school leaders 
can facilitate the programming of CS courses, ensuring there is adequate time for teacher 
planning and instruction and sufficient resources for CS implementation. Additionally, 
support from school leaders can help teachers navigate competing priorities, and they can 
cultivate student interest in CS. School leaders are instrumental in creating a vision for CS 
within their school, communicating what CS is and why it is important, and making it clear 
why CS is an instructional priority. Furthermore, school leaders are essential in fostering an 
inclusive CS environment by inviting students to learn more about CS, making them feel 
welcome in CS activities, and ensuring CS opportunities are available to all students.   
Recommendations 
Over the last several years, CS4All has developed and offered PL and provided support for 
school leaders. This PL includes guidance on developing school CS implementation plans, 
reviews of school-level student participation data to help leaders assess their school’s 
progress and areas for growth, and the provision of resources for building CS culture and 
capacity (e.g., resources for planning a CS Education Week event and grade-level CS 
planning tools). Our findings suggest that increasing CS implementation may hinge on 
these strategies. In addition to the school leader PL, our findings suggest the district should 
continue to cultivate teacher leadership in CS through PL offerings and opportunities, and 
by supporting cross-school and cross-district sharing of effective practices. 
Finally, to be successful, CS4All will need to engage leaders at the highest district levels, 
including superintendents and executive superintendents. This will help them better 
understand the importance and benefits of CS education and enable them to effectively 
communicate this priority to school leaders. It will also help ensure sufficient resources for 
implementation and capacity building.  

24 
Addressing Structural Barriers to Implementation 
Structural barriers at the school and district level pose significant challenges to CS 
implementation and teacher retention. Surveyed teachers consistently reported issues such 
as lack of dedicated instructional time for CS, competing priorities in the curriculum, 
changes in teaching assignments, CS courses not being scheduled, and CS instruction not 
being seen as a priority. These challenges were particularly acute in schools serving 
students with higher economic needs, exacerbating equity gaps in CS education. 
As noted above, school administrators play a critical role in establishing structures and 
priorities to support CS implementation. However, many leaders may lack the knowledge 
and resources needed to effectively plan for and sustain CS programs. Staffing shortages, 
changes in teaching assignments, and turnover also emerged as key structural challenges, 
with many schools struggling to fill CS teacher positions and retain qualified teachers from 
year to year. This instability makes it difficult to build and maintain robust CS programs. 
Recommendations 
Addressing structural barriers requires a multi-faceted, systemic approach that involves 
policy and programmatic changes at both the district and school levels. CS4All should work 
with district and school leaders to develop and advocate for policies and practices that 
prioritize equitable CS education, including: 
•
Developing district-level CS teacher pipelines and incentives to attract and retain
qualified CS teachers, especially in high-need schools; and
•
Creating district-wide networks and professional learning communities for CS
teachers and administrators to collaborate, share resources, and problem-solve
around common challenges.
At the school level, CS4All should continue to provide tailored support and guidance to help 
leaders develop and implement comprehensive CS education plans. This could include: 
•
Working with school teams to conduct needs assessments and develop multi-year
implementation plans that address structural barriers;
•
Continuing to provide PL and coaching for school leaders on effective CS program
design, scheduling, budgeting, and staffing, including guidance and support for
developing master schedules that provide sufficient time for CS instruction;
•
Facilitating school-to-school partnerships and mentoring to share best practices and
solutions for common implementation challenges; and
•
Working with schools to develop and make use of tools that help integrate CS
education goals and strategies into larger school improvement plans.
Supporting Teacher Learning and Community Building 
Many CS teachers are the only ones in their school building, and many are also new to their 
roles as CS teachers. This situation makes it even more critical that they have access to 
high-quality PL experiences, curriculum resources, and opportunities to connect with other 
CS teachers–allowing them to receive coaching or mentoring, and to share resources and 
best practices. While implementing teachers reported lack of expertise in CS content and 
instructional practices as less significant barriers, non-implementing teachers were much 

25 
more likely to cite these as a challenge. This disparity suggests that targeted support for 
building CS pedagogical knowledge and skills could be particularly beneficial for teachers 
who have not yet implemented CS. Additionally, many teachers' responses to open-ended 
questions about the support they needed indicate that both implementing and non- 
implementing teachers would benefit from more and continued learning opportunities to 
deepen their CS content knowledge and instructional practices. 
Recommendations 
Our findings point to the importance of ongoing PL opportunities for teachers to deepen 
their knowledge of CS content and pedagogy, and to increase their comfort and facility with 
CS instruction. CS4All will need to continue to recruit additional teachers to implement CS 
instruction in response to teacher attrition and retention challenges. The district should 
establish and support teacher communities of practice, common planning time, and 
coaching/mentoring to facilitate ongoing learning and sharing of effective pedagogical 
strategies. Consider evaluating which aspects of teacher support can effectively be 
delivered through virtual or asynchronous methods as a cost-efficient way to reach more 
teachers, while maintaining in-person support where it adds the most value.  
“We are often denied the opportunity to attend CS-specific PD, which is a significant 
loss because where else can we get support from people in the same field as us? 
Finally, when I am observed, the admins do not always understand what is going on, 
which hampers both my evaluation's salience and the degree to which my reviewers 
can provide me with direction and support to improve my teaching.”- High School 
Teacher (2023) 
“[I need] continued professional learning opportunities. It would probably be helpful 
to have a CS4All lead teach a CS lesson or two to our students (live) so we can learn 
best practices and execution styles. This would be helpful for me because I am new 
to teaching computer science. I would also say we need more resources for our 
beginner MLLs [multilingual learners].” - Middle School CS Lead teacher (2021) 
Embedding Culturally Responsive-Sustaining Education Practices in CS 
CR-SE is a critical component of building teacher capacity to provide equitable and 
engaging CS instruction. Our research suggests that PL focused on CR-SE practices led to 
increased implementation of these approaches in CS classrooms and greater teacher 
confidence in delivering culturally relevant instruction. Teachers reported that integrating 
CR-SE improved relationships with students, increased student interest and engagement, 
and helped students see the relevance of CS to their lives and identities. 
Recommendations 
To build a sustainable CS teacher workforce capable of delivering equitable, rigorous, and 
engaging instruction for all students, CR-SE must be prioritized as a core component of 
teacher capacity-building efforts. CS4All should continue to emphasize and expand its CR- 
SE focused offerings, integrating these practices into all aspects of the initiative's supports 
for teachers. This approach ensures that CR-SE principles are not merely an add-on, but a 
fundamental aspect of CS instruction, enhancing teachers' ability to create inclusive, 
engaging, and culturally relevant learning environments. This could include:  

•
Developing tools to help teachers assess and strengthen CR-SE in their CS
instruction;
•
Providing coaching and peer feedback to support teachers in implementing CR-SE
practices;
•
Showcasing examples of teachers successfully applying CR-SE in CS and
facilitating the sharing of best practices;
•
Partnering with schools to build CR-SE considerations into CS curriculum planning
and implementation; and
•
Advocating for CR-SE focused teacher preparation to build these competencies in
the pre-service pipeline.
In addition, more research should be conducted to explore exactly how and in what ways 
CR-SE PL changes teacher practices and results in improved outcomes for students. 
Building Longer-Term Teacher Capacity and Sustainability 
As CS education continues to expand in NYC schools, the CS4All initiative will need to 
develop additional strategies to build long-term teacher capacity and sustainability. While 
the initiative has made significant strides in providing professional learning opportunities 
and support for current teachers, there are several key areas where further action is 
needed to ensure a robust and qualified CS teacher workforce in the years to come. 
One critical issue is the need to align CS4All's teacher preparation and support efforts with 
evolving state teacher licensure and certification requirements. In the longer term, schools 
and districts will need to plan for new state teacher licensure and certification requirements 
that go beyond the minimal in-service PL experiences, especially for CS courses to be 
eligible for credit. While there are efforts underway to develop new certification programs 
and pathways, there will need to be incentives and supports for teachers to participate in 
these programs, planning for preservice teachers who are entering the workforce to teach 
CS, and intentional efforts to support and retain these teachers, particularly when staffing 
shortages in CS are likely to persist. 
Another policy that may affect teacher capacity and retention is the emergence of new state 
requirements across the country focused on making CS a core subject or a requirement for 
high school graduation (code.org, 2023, Zarch et al., 2024). Although there is not a high 
school CS requirement in NY state currently, eight states do have a CS graduation 
requirement in place, and other states are considering adding one (code.org, 2023). While 
these requirements would certainly give students access to CS opportunities, they will also 
create a greater demand for qualified CS teachers. 
“Please make computer science education a high school credit requirement for 
graduation. All students should be required to take elective course(s) in computer 
science in elementary school, middle school, and high school.” - Middle School CS 
Lead Teacher (2021) 
Teacher retention and capacity building remain critical components of expanding access 
and increasing student participation in meaningful and engaging CS opportunities.  
26 

Recommendations 
27 
As New York State moves toward full implementation of the NY State Computer Science 
and Digital Fluency Standards, along with teacher certification requirements for teaching 
rigorous CS courses, additional teacher certification programs and pathways are becoming 
available to CS teachers. CS4All should work closely with district partners and teacher 
preparation programs to ensure that both pre-service and in-service teachers have access 
to the training and coursework needed to meet these new requirements. This may involve: 
•
Collaborating with the state and local colleges to develop or expand CS teacher
preparation programs that align with state certification requirements and the needs
of NYC schools.
•
Providing incentives and support for current CS teachers to pursue additional
coursework and certifications, such as scholarships, tuition reimbursement, or
release time for professional learning and certification programs.
•
Offering targeted PL for teachers who need to build specific CS content knowledge
or pedagogical skills to meet certification requirements; consider where virtual and
asynchronous PL and supports can support capacity building as a cost-effective
alternative to in person offerings.
•
Assessing the current and projected CS teacher workforce needs in NYC schools,
and developing targeted strategies to recruit, prepare, and retain qualified CS
teachers in high-need areas.
•
Partnering with district and school leaders to develop long-term staffing plans that
prioritize CS education and allocate resources for CS teacher positions.
In addition to these external factors, CS4All should continue to focus on providing the 
support and resources that teachers need to effectively implement CS instruction in their 
classrooms. This includes: 
•
Offering ongoing, differentiated professional learning opportunities that are
responsive to teachers' evolving needs and interests, such as advanced coursework
and new CS topics (e.g., artificial intelligence and quantum computing), peer
coaching, and specialized training in specific CS topics, tools, and pedagogies.
•
Developing and curating high-quality curriculum materials and instructional
resources that are aligned with state standards and can be adapted to meet the
needs of different school contexts and student populations.
•
Providing tools and guidance to help teachers assess student learning in CS and
use data to inform instruction and program improvement.
•
Facilitating teacher-led professional learning communities and networks that allow
CS teachers to share knowledge, collaborate on curriculum adaptation and
implementation, and problem-solve around common challenges.
The CS4All initiative has made significant strides in providing professional learning 
opportunities and support to build teacher capacity, yet challenges persist in addressing 
barriers and ensuring equitable implementation of CS across all schools. This report 
underscores the critical importance of teacher retention and capacity building as part of 
efforts to expand access and increase student participation in meaningful and engaging CS 
opportunities. 

The findings presented highlight promising strategies to address the challenges we’ve 
documented, including: providing ongoing support to school leaders; addressing structural 
barriers to implementation; fostering teacher learning and community building; and 
developing culturally responsive practices in CS instruction. By focusing on these key 
areas, CS4All can continue to advance toward its goal of providing high-quality, equitable 
computer science education to all students in New York City's public schools, thereby 
preparing them for success in an increasingly digital world. 
28 

29 
Endnotes 
1  
New York State created a computer science teaching certification in 2018. 
https://www.nysut.org/resources/all-listing/research/fact-sheets/fact-sheet-certification-in-computer-science 
2  
For more information on topics covered in different EECS levels, see the CS4All Equity Report 2023: 
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1UTJaJrezT1tgmNJcagxib6Wjnqbv6zKW/view 
3  
Source: https://www.chalkbeat.org/newyork/2023/9/6/23862194/nyc-teacher-workforce-shortages/ 
4  
For a discussion of STARS data reliability (including under- and over-reporting), see page 20 of the 
 
Research Alliance’s Computer Science in New York City report. https://steinhardt.nyu.edu/
research-alliance/research/publications/computer-science-new-york-city  
5  
See Fancsali, C. (2022). CS4All: Examining Equity in Computer Science Access and Participation in NYC 
 
Schools. Research Alliance for New York City Schools. https://steinhardt.nyu.edu/research-
alliance/research/cs4all-examining-equity 
6 
A school’s Economic Need Index (ENI) estimates the likelihood that its students are in poverty. It is 
calculated using the average of its students' Economic Need Values, which are based on factors such as 
the student's HRA-eligibility, housing status, and the income of families in the student's census tract as 
estimated by the American Community Survey 5-Year Estimate. 
References 
Code.org (2023). https://advocacy.code.org/2023_state_of_cs.pdf 
Computer Science Teachers Association (2013). Bugs in the System: Computer Science Teacher Certification 
in the US. Computer Science Teachers Association. 
Potvin, P., & Hasni, A. (2014). Analysis of the Decline in Interest Towards School Science and Technology from 
Grades 5 through 11. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 23(6), 784- 802. 
Mark, J., Fancsali, C., Lee, J., Li, X., Jain, R., & Crawford, C. (2023). “Getting My Feet Wet and Starting Small”: 
Building Capacity for Culturally Responsive CS. 2023 Research on Equity and Sustained Participation in 
Engineering, Computing, and Technology (RESPECT), Atlanta, GA.  
Shein, E. (2019). The CS Teacher Shortage. Communications of the ACM, 62, 17–18. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3355375 
Zarch, R., Boisvert,D., Bhatnagar, S., and Goldwasser, T. (2024).  Computer Science as a Graduation 
Requirement: A Landscape Analysis Report. Sage Fox Consulting. https://fdee7a0c-1b88-4969-8d2f- 
27a9759d393e.usrfiles.com/ugd/fdee7a_9ba8a25f51cf463c927f672a46c5ebac. 

This page has been intentionally left blank. 

The Research Alliance conducts 
rigorous studies on topics that matter to 
the City’s public schools. We strive to 
advance equity and excellence in 
education by providing nonpartisan 
evidence about policies and practices 
that promote students’ development and 
academic success. 
© 2025 Research Alliance for New York City Schools. All rights reserved. You may make copies of and distribute this 
work for non-commercial educational and scholarly purposes. For any other uses, including the making of derivative 
works, permission must be obtained from the Research Alliance for New York City Schools, unless fair use 
exceptions to copyright law apply. 
627 Broadway, 7th Floor 
New York, NY, 10012 
(212) 992-7697
research.alliance@nyu.edu 
www.rancys.org 
