TITLE: All Aboard
URL: https://cbcny.org/research/all-aboard
ISSUED: 2025-03-21
PDF: https://cbcny.org/sites/default/files/media/files/CBCREPORT_MTA-Financing_03212025_0.pdf

REPORT  TRANSPORTATION
All Aboard
How to Fairly Fund MTA Capital Investment Now
Press Release
Download Report
Print
Share
EXPAND TABLE OF CONTENTS
March 21, 2025
Contents
Executive Summary
Introduction
Critical MTA Capital Investment Remains Unfunded
A Fiscally Sustainable, Balanced Financing and Accountability Proposal for the MTA Capital Plan
Focus on Rebuild and Improve; Defer Expansion
Finance the $31.8 Billion Gap Sustainability and Fairly
City and State PAYGO Financing
Increase City and State General Contributions by $2 Billion Each
Shift Funds to Further Increase State Contributions by $5 Billion
User Fees and Charges
Increase Vehicle Registration Fees in the MTA Region to Support $2 Billion in Capital Spending
Increase Fares and Tolls to Support $4.8 Billion in Capital Spending
A $16.0 Billion Gap Remains
Regionalize Three Revenue Sources Previously Applied Only to NYC
Increasing the Payroll Mobility Tax
Increasing Sales Tax in the MTA Region
Hold the MTA Accountable for Cost-Effective Capital Delivery
Ensure at Least $500 Million of Labor-Flexibility-Generated, Recurring Operating Budget Savings
Turn the Tide on Fare Evasion
Conclusion
Executive Summary

The Metropolitan Transportation Authority’s (MTA’s) $1.5 trillion in assets require massive investment to be brought to and maintained in a state of good repair. Otherwise, they will fail to function reliably and efficiently. The MTA is not just vital to its riders, but to the economy and quality of life for the residents, tourists, and businesses in the City, region, and State. 

The MTA’s proposed 2025-2029 Capital Plan included $68.4 billion of investments over the next five years, fully 95 percent of which support “Rebuilding and Improving” the system. However, the MTA only identified $35.0 billion in funding, leaving a $33.4 billion gap. Neither the Governor nor the Legislature have advanced a plan to fill that gap. 

Leaving the nation’s largest mass transit system in this precarious state would be unacceptable. The State should enact and implement a plan that invests in critical state of good repair and key modernization projects, spreads the costs fairly among the many beneficiaries, moves toward financing sustainability, and preserves New York’s competitiveness. 

The simple truth is that support for the MTA has to come from somewhere. More funding should come from the State and City budgets, the system’s users, labor, and perhaps even other taxpayers, but disinvestment would hurt everyone. 

This commitment of funds should come with increased transparency and accountability—to ensure money is spent wisely and boost public confidence—and scrutiny on what drives the cost of MTA capital projects, whether it be situational, legal, regulatory, or managerial.

CBC’s analyses found that:

The $68.4 billion size of the 2025-2029 Capital Plan is very ambitious but reasonable, given the investment needed;
The State Fiscal Year 2026 Executive Budget increased the financing gap to $35.4 billion by lowering the City’s and State’s contributions by $1.0 billion each;
The MTA’s operating budget will become increasingly precarious in the next few years and cannot support the proposed $10.0 billion of operating-budget-backed debt; and
The MTA’s expected $14.0 billion in federal aid to the capital plan is reasonable based on past support but is less certain under the current administration.

Joining a funding package with actions that increase the MTA’s accountability and transparency for capital project delivery and cost-effectiveness, and an examination of other factors that increase MTA costs, would help ensure valuable public resources are well spent, and boost public confidence in and commitment to the MTA.

No single group should bear the cost of funding MTA infrastructure investments. CBC’s Focus, Fix, and Finance report recommended that financing be sustainable and supported by all beneficiaries of the system. Resources should come fairly from across the MTA region and from riders, drivers, and taxpayers. Labor, which benefits from the system’s preservation as well as investment paying for jobs, also should contribute; it can do so by providing the flexibility needed to increase operational efficiency, not through diminution of wages.

Financing should be sustainable. It should be affordable within the operating budget, rely on pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) financing to the greatest extent possible, and not require new tax increases for each subsequent plan.

To fund the critical investments, the MTA and the State should: 

Focus the Capital Plan exclusively on Rebuild and Improve projects;
This shrinks the funding gap from $35.4 billion to $31.8 billion by removing $3.6 billion slated for expansion;1
Increase the City and State contribution by $9.0 billion in pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) financing, including;
$2.0 billion in additional general appropriations from both the City and the State;
An additional $5.0 billion from the State, which could come from the proposed “inflation refund” and a small portion of school aid that goes to wealthy districts; and
59 percent of the total City and State appropriations would come from City taxpayers; and
Modestly increase fares, tolls, and vehicle registration fees to generate revenue to support a $6.8 billion investment.

These actions reduce the shortfall to $16.0 billion. To fill this, State leaders should select sources that preserve the region’s competitiveness and are apportioned fairly. They may choose to further add City and State appropriations, user fees, or charges, as presented above. 

But discussions in Albany indicate they also may choose to raise taxes. If they do, the burden should be spread to promote fairness and competitiveness. Lawmakers may choose to consider options including regionalizing New York City-only MTA-supporting taxes, small increases in the payroll mobility tax (PMT), or small increases in sales taxes, among others.

To ensure MTA accountability, cost-effective capital delivery, MTA debt affordability, and operating budget stability, the plan should:

Require the MTA to publish project plans, user-friendly capital project status reports, regular updates on each asset group’s state of repair, and a joint study on comparative capital project costs; 
Ensure labor provides the flexibility to generate at least $500 million in recurring operating budget savings needed to support $8 billion of the planned operating-budget-backed debt; 
Require a study to identify any State or City laws or regulations that increase MTA capital costs; and 
Include provisions to catalyze action and provide tools to the District Attorneys, police and the MTA to dramatically turn the tide on fare evasion, which could increase revenue by hundreds of millions of dollars.

This balanced, comprehensive approach would serve the MTA, the region, and New Yorkers well. It would fund investments needed to rebuild and improve the system, spread the contributions fairly across beneficiaries including labor, maintain the State’s competitiveness, improve cost-effective capital project delivery, and help stabilize the MTA’s operating budget.

The MTA cannot begin work on any of the projects in its capital plan is approved, so the State should act now. Uncertainty about federal funding—for this plan as well as congestion pricing—compounds the need for the State to act quickly and thoughtfully to fully fund the MTA’s 2025-2029 Capital Plan. 

Download Executive Summary
Executive Summary: All Aboard: How to Fairly Fund MTA Capital Investment Now (267.05 KB)
Introduction

The Metropolitan Transportation Authority’s (MTA’s) $1.5 trillion in assets requires ongoing investment to get to and maintain a state of good repair and ensure the public transit system in the New York City region functions reliably and efficiently. The MTA’s proposed 2025-2029 Capital Plan, published in October 2024, included $68.4 billion of investments over the next five years, nearly 95 percent of which support “Rebuilding and Improving” the system.2

However, the MTA only identified $35.0 billion available funding, including State and City appropriations, MTA operating-budget backed debt, toll-backed debt, and federal aid, leaving a funding gap of $35.4 billion. Furthermore, the expectation of $14.0 billion of federal support for the 2025-2029 Capital Plan may be optimistic under the current federal Administration, and congestion pricing remains at risk. 

The plan was submitted to the State Capital Program Review Board (CPRB) for approval but was vetoed in December 2024. The Speaker of the NYS Assembly and the NYS Senate Majority Leader, both members of the CPRB, sent a letter to the MTA explaining that their veto was a result of the plan’s lack of financing. Without CPRB approval, the MTA cannot initiate projects in the 2025-2029 Capital Plan, even those for which financing has been identified, and cannot draw down any federal capital funds available for projects in the plan. This leaves the future of the nation’s largest mass transit system and the lifeblood of New York City’s and the region’s economy in a precarious state of uncertainty. 

This report presents the funding sources identified by the MTA and the Governor, provides recommendations on how the State should fill a portion of the MTA’s Capital Plan funding gap, and explores options that could be carefully leveraged to fully fund the Capital Plan. It also presents a set of accountability measures and comparative analyses to help ensure these dollars are spent cost-effectively. Furthermore, it identifies the criticality of labor-generated productivity savings to support planned operating budget-backed debt and the need to reduce fare evasion to stabilize the operating budget.    

Investing in the system’s infrastructure is critical, since the MTA’s trains and buses enable the region’s economy by moving millions of people every day. However, investment in the region’s transportation infrastructure needs to be thoughtful and not endanger New York’s competitiveness by further straining the budgets of the City, State, or their residents. 

Critical MTA Capital Investment Remains Unfunded

With the State budget soon due, it is imperative that the State’s leaders make wise choices to fund the system’s critical capital needs. A reliable and high-quality mass transit system is essential to the City’s competitiveness but so is a sustainable and appropriately balanced financing plan.

The 2025-2029 Capital Plan built on a Twenty-Year Needs Assessment, released in October 2023, that laid out the system’s dire condition and extensive capital needs. The Plan’s size is ambitious but reasonable, given how many of the system’s assets are in poor or marginal condition. However, even the proposed level of investment will only marginally move the needle on the overall state of good repair, leaving it to future capital plans to further rebuild and improve the system. 

The MTA identified $35.0 billion in financing, which left a $33.4 billion financing gap. (See Table 1). The State Executive Budget did not include a full financing plan but rather adapted the MTA plan and reduced the City and State support by $1.0 billion each, increasing this gap to $35.4 billion. 

Unfortunately, neither the Governor in her Fiscal Year 2026 Executive Budget nor the NYS Assembly and NYS Senate in their one-house budgets proposed a financing plan for the MTA 2025-2029 Capital Plan. 

CBC found that:

At $68.4 billion, the overall size of the 2025-2029 Capital Plan is ambitious but reasonable, given the level of investment that is needed;
94.8 percent, or $64.8 billion, is to rebuild and improve the system;
5.2 percent, or $3.6 billion, is for network expansion, including $2.8 billion for Interborough Express planning and design;
Based on the NYS Fiscal Year 2026 Executive Budget, the financing gap is $35.4 billion;
The gap is $2.0 billion larger than the MTA’s plan because the State Executive Budget included $6.0 billion in City and State support, while the MTA included $8.0 billion;
The MTA’s operating budget will become increasingly precarious in the next few years; 
It has deficits of approximately $400 million starting in 2027, and a structural gap exceeding $1.0 billion;
One-time casino license fees, expected to yield $500 million a year for three years, will only be available from 2026 to 2028;
Fare evasion saps roughly $800 million annually from fare and toll revenues;
Overtime costs exceeded $1.1 billion in 2024, driven in part by a significant decrease in worker availability;3
Worker days per year dropped from 214 days in 2001 to 206 days in 2019 to 196 days in 2023;4
Given future budget gaps, the operating budget cannot support the proposed $10.0 billion of operating-budget-backed debt;
CBC previously estimated that the MTA could support $2.0 billion in borrowing; and
The MTA expects $14.0 billion in federal aid to support the 2025-2029 Capital Plan, which is reasonable based on historical funding levels, but is uncertain under the current federal Administration.

Furthermore, in the past, MTA capital projects have run over time and over budget. While there have been significant improvements in recent years, skepticism regarding whether the MTA can deliver its capital plan in a cost-effective manner remains. 

A Fiscally Sustainable, Balanced Financing and Accountability Proposal for the MTA Capital Plan

Capital financing should be appropriately allocated and sustainable, as CBC outlined in its Focus, Fix, and Finance report. All beneficiaries of the system should contribute: resources should come from across the MTA region and from riders, drivers, and taxpayers. Financing should also be sustainable, which means affordable within the operating budget, reliant on pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) financing to the greatest extent possible and not require new tax increases for each subsequent plan.

Based on the critical nature of mass transit to the region’s economy and the dire need to invest in the system’s capital assets, CBC recommends the MTA and the State: 

Focus the Capital Plan exclusively on Rebuild and Improve projects;
This shrinks the funding gap from $35.4 billion to $31.8 billion by removing $3.6 billion slated for expansion;5
Increase the City and State contribution by $9.0 billion in pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) financing, including;
$2.0 billion in additional general appropriations from both the City and the State;
An additional $5.0 billion from the State, which could come from the proposed sales tax rebate and a small portion of school aid that goes to wealthy school districts; and
59 percent of the total City and State appropriations would come from City taxpayers; and
Modestly increase fares, tolls, and vehicle registration fees to generate revenue to support a $6.8 billion investment;
Hold the MTA accountable for cost-effective capital delivery;
Require it to publish project plans, capital project status reports, regular updates on each asset group’s state of repair, and a joint study on comparative capital project costs; 
Require a study to identify any State or City laws or regulations that increase MTA capital costs;  
Ensure labor provides the flexibility to generate at least $500 million in recurring operating budget savings needed to support $8.0 billion of the planned operating-budget-backed debt; and 
Include provisions to catalyze action and provide tools to the District Attorneys, police and the MTA to dramatically turn the tide on fare evasion, which could increase revenue by hundreds of millions of dollars. 

This comprehensive approach would fund the investments needed to rebuild and improve the system with a balanced approach that spreads funding across beneficiaries and maintains the State’s competitiveness, holds the MTA accountable, and shores up the operating budget.

Focus on Rebuild and Improve; Defer Expansion

The 2025-2029 MTA Capital Plan is heavily focused on rebuilding and improving the system but still contains $3.6 billion in proposed spending for system expansion. This would draw capital resources from urgent state of good repair and modernization work that should take priority to keep the system functioning safely and reliably. Removing the $2.8 billion for design and planning for the Interborough Express (IBX) and the $800 million for “Other Network Expansion” would reduce the plan to $64.8 billion and the financing gap to $31.8 billion.

Finance the $31.8 Billion Gap Sustainability and Fairly

No single revenue source should be tapped to provide the $31.8 billion; such a choice would place too much of the funding burden on one group rather than distributing it across all beneficiaries of the system. Instead, riders, drivers and taxpayers should all contribute to funding the $31.8 billion remaining gap. To begin to fill the gap with sustainable and appropriately allocated financing, the State should add: (See Figure 1.) 

$9.0 billion more in City and State appropriations; and
$6.8 billion from higher fares, tolls, and vehicle registration fees.

This reduces the shortfall to $16.0 billion. To fill this, State leaders should select sources that preserve the region’s competitiveness and are apportioned fairly. They may choose to further add City and State appropriations, user fees, or charges. If instead they choose to raise taxes, the burden should be spread to promote fairness and competitiveness.

City and State PAYGO Financing

Total appropriations from the State and the City should increase by $9 billion, $2 billion in additional general appropriations from both the City and the State budgets, and an additional $5 billion of redirected State funding. (See Table 2.) These appropriations are financially sustainable because they provide resources that can be used to pay for capital up front, or on a pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) basis, rather than increasing the MTA’s indebtedness.

In total, the State budget would provide $10 billion and the City budget $5 billion. Since 38.5 percent of State tax revenues come from residents and businesses in New York City, $8.9 billion (59 percent) would be from City taxpayers and $6.1 billion (41 percent) from other State taxpayers.6 

Increase City and State General Contributions by $2 Billion Each

Given the importance of the state of good repair work in the 2025-2029 Capital Plan, the City and State should both increase their contribution by $2 billion over the $3 billion each proposed in the Governor’s Executive Budget. This would bring the City and State contribution to $10 billion total, $5 billion each. This additional support should not come from new revenue sources but from within the existing State and City budgets. 

Over the past fifteen years, New York City has contributed $6.4 billion to MTA capital construction and New York State has contributed $12.9 billion. Each most recently contributed $3 billion to the MTA’s 2020-2024 Capital Program. Given the increase in capital needs and the rising cost of construction, a greater contribution for the next five-year plan is reasonable. 

Shift Funds to Further Increase State Contributions by $5 Billion

An additional $5 billion would bring the State’s total contribution to $10 billion. New York State contributed $9 billion to the MTA’s 2015-2019 Capital Plan. Given construction inflation, the size of financing gap, and State receipts growth, commensurate contributions for this Capital Plan are reasonable. 

The additional $5 billion should be funded using existing resources. Potential sources include redirecting a small portion of State school aid from wealthy districts that self-fund a sound basic education or redirecting some or all of the one-time “inflation refund” checks in the Governor’s proposed budget. 

New York State provides roughly $2.5 billion in State aid to school districts that already fully fund a sound basic education with local and federal support each school year.7 Over five years, the State will allocate $12.5 billion to self-funding districts. Redirecting just 40 percent of those funds would cover this addition to the MTA’s 2025-2029 Capital Plan. 

Alternatively, the Executive Budget proposed $3 billion in one-time “inflation refund” checks. These $300 and $500 checks spread $3 billion so thinly that they will not meaningfully make New York more affordable for any single family. Redirecting some or all of the $3 billion to the MTA would have a major impact.

User Fees and Charges

All beneficiaries of the mass transit system should contribute to its capital investment. Riders benefit from the frequent and relatively low cost of mass transit in the New York region. Drivers benefit because the MTA’s robust mass transit system keeps so many New Yorkers on buses, trains, and subways, rather than cars that would worsen traffic congestion. 

Increase Vehicle Registration Fees in the MTA Region to Support $2 Billion in Capital Spending

Doubling the MTA vehicle registration fee from $50 to $100 for every 2-year vehicle registration would yield $126 million annually, and could support $2 billion in capital spending.8 Vehicle registration fees are paid every two years, and in the MTA region are composed of three parts: a State fee, a county or City fee, and an MTA fee.9 Doubling the MTA vehicle registration fee would increase the average registration fee in New York City, for example, from $140 to $190.

Increase Fares and Tolls to Support $4.8 Billion in Capital Spending

An additional, separate 4.0 percent yield fare and toll increase would generate $300 million annually and could support an additional $4.8 billion in capital financing.10 This fare increase should be dedicated to capital investment and would ideally flow to the capital lockbox or otherwise be isolated from fares and tolls that flow to the operating budget. 

The MTA’s regular biennial fare and toll increases to support its operating budget are planned for August 2025 and March 2027. An additional 4 percent yield increase could be spread over the already planned 4.0 percent yield increases, bringing them to 6.0 percent yield, or as a separate increase in 2026. 

A $16.0 Billion Gap Remains 

Even after increasing the PAYGO contributions by $9.0 billion, and user fees and charges to support $6.8 billion in bonding, a $16.0 billion financing gap remains. (See Table 3.) 

This shortfall is still significant. To fill this, State leaders should select sources that preserve the region’s competitiveness and are apportioned fairly. They may choose to further add City and State appropriations, user fees, or charges, like those presented above. Filling the gap with those sources alone would require essentially doubling what has already been recommended.

State leaders may choose to raise taxes to fill some of the remaining gap. Since this is under active consideration in Albany, CBC offers the following considerations and information to help leaders ensure any decisions focus on fairness and competitiveness. 

Any tax increases should spread the burden to promote fairness and competitiveness. Filling the gap to fund capital projects on a PAYGO basis, instead of borrowing, would require new revenues of $3.2 billion a year to fund $16.0 billion over five years. While having the benefit of not having to raise a new tax for each new capital plan, it is a prohibitively exorbitant amount that would damage New York’s competitiveness. While not proving the desired sustainability, a $1.0 billion increase in annual tax revenues, when used to support 30-year bonds, could also fill the $16.0 billion gap. 

Still, given New York’s standing as the nation’s highest taxer, when localities are included, raising taxes should be approached with great caution and trepidation. It is critical to carefully consider the various taxes that could be raised, the constituencies who pay those taxes, and how they would affect the State’s competitiveness given our nation-leading status in taxing.  New York State and its localities already collect the most taxes per resident and per $1,000 of personal income. Furthermore, New York has the highest combined marginal personal income and corporate income tax rates in the country.  

Among other options, State leaders may consider the following.

Regionalize Three Revenue Sources Previously Applied Only to NYC

The MTA receives subsidies from a variety of taxes and fees that apply to both New York City and the surrounding suburbs in the 12-county Metropolitan Commuter Transportation District (MCTD) that is served by the MTA. However, several of these revenue sources apply either only to New York City, or have higher rates in the City, including the Mansion Tax, a Sales Tax Intercept, and the Payroll Mobility Tax. Regionalizing these taxes to have consistent rates in the entire 12-county region would ensure all geographic beneficiaries of the MTA are contributing and that the burden of supporting the MTA is not unduly placed on New York City. It would yield $300 million annually and support $4.8 billion in capital spending.

The Mansion Tax applies to all homes sold in New York State for more than $1 million dollars; these funds flow to the State’s general fund. In 2019, the State imposed an additional graduated tax on residential sales in New York City of more than $2 million, with rates ranging between 0.25 percent and 3.15 percent,11 depending on the sale price. These revenues are deposited into the MTA’s Capital Lockbox and are required by law to support the MTA’s capital programs. The 2019 increase was not applied to the seven MTA-region counties outside New York City. NYC Mansion Tax revenues generated $323 million in 2024, and regionalizing the New York City Mansion Tax rates to the rest of the MTA region would yield approximately $100 million annually. 

At the same time, the State directed the State Comptroller to “intercept” $170 million and $150 million in sales tax revenue from New York City and New York State, respectively, starting in 2020 and increasing by 1 percent a year. This intercept was connected to the increase in sales tax revenue expected from requiring online marketplace sellers to collect sales tax following the U.S. Supreme Court ruling in South Dakota v Wayfair, Inc. The City’s intercept was $177 million in 2024 and equal to 1.7 percent of New York City’s total sales tax revenue. Regionalizing the sales tax intercept to redirect 1.7 percent of sales tax revenues from the seven MTA counties outside of New York City would yield approximately $100 million annually, while reducing local sales tax collections by that amount.

The Metropolitan Commuter Transportation Mobility Tax, commonly known as the Payroll Mobility Tax (PMT), is a tax paid by employers with more than $312,500 in payroll expenses per quarter. The State raised the PMT rate from 0.34 percent to 0.60 percent on businesses in New York City with payrolls of greater than $437,500 per quarter in 2023 to help stabilize the MTA’s operating budget. The 2023 increase on businesses in New York City was not applied to businesses in the remainder of the MTA’s service area. The 2023 increase was projected to yield $1.1 billion annually.12  Applying that same increase to businesses with the highest payrolls in the seven counties outside New York City would yield approximately $100 million annually. 

Increasing the Payroll Mobility Tax

It is critically important to note that the Payroll Mobility Tax (PMT) was increased recently as part of the MTA’s operating budget bailout. While it is a broad-based tax, another increase would not only affect the same taxpayers but could send a negative signal to businesses in the region. 

A 17 percent increase on the Payroll Mobility Tax (PMT), on top of the regionalization previously discussed, would yield $380 million per year, with $333 million coming from New York City and $47 million coming from the surrounding counties in the MTA region. It could support $6.1 billion in capital spending.13

A 17 percent increase was used to illustrate the impact because it translates to a 0.1 percentage point increase in the PMT rate for the highest payroll businesses, with proportional increases on businesses with lower payrolls. These proportional increases translate to a 0.02 percentage point increase for the businesses with quarterly payrolls between $312,500 and $375,000, and 0.06 percentage points for businesses with quarterly payrolls between $375,000 and $437,500.14 Business taxes under this structure would increase by $275 per year for businesses in the middle of the lowest quarterly payroll expenses and $975 per year for businesses in the middle of the second PMT bracket. Businesses in the top bracket would pay $1,000 more for every additional $1 million dollars in payroll expenses. 

Increasing Sales Tax in the MTA Region

Sales taxes are considered regressive but also have the benefit of being very broad based. Sales tax rates in the MTA region range from 8.375 percent in Putnam County to 8.875 percent in New York City and Yonkers.15 This total rate is a combination of the State sales tax (4.000 percent), a local sales tax (that ranges between 3.000 percent and 4.500 percent), and a 0.375 percent MTA sales tax in the MTA region. 

Increasing the MTA sales tax by 0.125 percentage points from 0.375 percent to 0.500 percent would yield $425 million in new revenues per year and could support $6.8 billion in capital spending.16 In New York City, for example, consumers would experience a 1.4 percent increase in the sales tax; the sales tax on a $100.00 purchase would increase by $0.11, from $8.88 to $9.00.

Hold the MTA Accountable for Cost-Effective Capital Delivery

The magnitude of the MTA’s capital needs requires the Authority to spend every dollar wisely. While the MTA has made progress increasing the efficiency and timeliness of its capital project execution, it has not overcome its historical reputation for delayed, over-budget projects; this leads to skepticism among the public and elected officials about providing even more capital funding. Some cite recent MTA capital projects such as the Second Avenue Subway and Grand Central Madison that have been some of the most expensive per-mile projects in the world.17

That is why it is reasonable to couple additional funding for the MTA’s Capital Plan with accountability measures designed to ensure the MTA can deliver capital projects efficiently and with a greater level of public trust. Specifically, the MTA should: 

Provide project plans with budgets and timelines for all projects;
Provide user-friendly, annual progress reports with updates on individual project timelines and costs; 
Provide annual or biennial reports on the MTA’s progress towards bringing the system into a state of good repair by showing the fraction of each asset category in each of the MTA’s five condition ratings; and
Collaborate with an external entity to perform an impartial comparative study to benchmark MTA capital costs against national and international peers.

Additionally, CBC recommends that New York State commission a study to identify any New York State and New York City laws, codes, and requirements contribute to high capital costs and possible legislative changes to reduce those cost burdens. 

When requiring these measures, a few considerations are essential. Beneficial MTA contracting improvements, such as bundling projects, makes it harder to project the costs and determine the schedules of future projects. The goal is to have the planned sequencing and timing of projects for the full plan be transparent, while allowing for and reporting on those changes that will happen as plans become closer to initiation. 

Also, the MTA is a leader in providing significant amounts of data to the public. The State should review all of its reporting and data requirements to determine if any are no longer needed or used. Progress reports should be user-friendly, though with sufficient detail, so that the public knows the status of all projects in process and any updates to all the projects included in the plan. 

Ensure at Least $500 Million of Labor-Flexibility-Generated, Recurring Operating Budget Savings

Like all other stakeholders, labor should contribute to ensuring the funding for critically needed capital investment is available. MTA employees benefit from capital spending because it keeps the system they work for running and pays for some employees’ compensation. While others will be asked to pay more, labor’s contribution should come from providing flexibility to increase operational efficiency, not through diminution of wages. 

The MTA plans to issue $10 billion in Transportation Revenue Bonds to support the 2025-2029 Capital Plan. Transportation Revenue Bonds are repaid out of the MTA’s operating budget; therefore, operating revenues needed to pay for debt service are not available to support bus, subway, and rail operations. Given the operating budget’s fiscal stress, excessive debt service payments can put adequate funding for transit services at risk. CBC previously estimated that the MTA had a modest capacity to take on $2 billion of additional debt, $8 billion less than the MTA’s proposal.18

In order to afford the planned debt financing, the MTA needs to generate roughly $500 million to pay the debt service on $8 billion of its planned borrowing.19 This should come from labor-generated efficiencies that reduce ongoing costs. 

The MTA implemented $400 million of annual efficiencies by the end of 2024 and is on track to deliver an additional $100 million by the end of 2025.20 These have provided additional stability and flexibility to the Authority’s operating budget but only represent 2 percent of the Authority’s $19.6 billion operating budget in 2024. Furthermore, they were largely identified and implemented without significant changes that require labor flexibility. 

CBC previously identified up to $2.9 billion in operating efficiencies the MTA could realize if it delivered service more efficiently, adopted best practices from other transit agencies, and aligned its health insurance policy with New York State.21 However, the MTA has not been able to implement many of these changes because they require labor to allow operational changes. 

Furthermore, the number of days each MTA employee is available to work has declined significantly over the last decade. This decreases productivity and increases overtime costs. Reversing this provides another significant opportunity for increased efficiency.

Turn the Tide on Fare Evasion

Fare evasion, which cost the MTA about $200 million annually prior to the COVID pandemic, saw a dramatic post-pandemic jump to $700 million in lost revenue in 2022. Since then, the lost revenue has likely exceeded $800 million per year. The MTA has started to bend the curve on fare evasion for subways and commuter rail in the last 6 months, but this level of unpaid ridership puts significant pressure on the operating budget. 

Fare and toll evasion is a complex phenomenon and bringing levels back to pre-pandemic norms will require many varied and complementary strategies.22 In addition to MTA efforts to make evasion more difficult to execute, such as new fare gates, there needs to be cooperation from law enforcement to issue citations, arrest repeat offenders, and prosecute theft of service. 

Any capital funding plan should include provisions to catalyze action and provide tools to the District Attorneys, police and the MTA to dramatically turn the tide on fare evasion. Shoring up the operating budget to be able to provide reliable, safe, and high-quality service requires bringing down fare evasion.

Conclusion

The MTA’s capital needs are substantial. But not funding the Capital Plan puts the transit system that moves the region’s economy and the commuters who rely on it at risk. The State should close the Capital Plan funding gap through a thoughtful mix of additional PAYGO financing from the City and State operating budgets, additional user fees, fares, and tolls, as well as thoughtful measures that spread contributions broadly across the region and beneficiaries of the transit system. The MTA cannot begin work on any of the projects in its capital plan until the plan is approved. Uncertainty about the security of federal funding—for this plan as well as congestion pricing—compounds the need for the State to act quickly and thoughtfully to fully fund the MTA’s 2025-2029 Capital Plan.

By Adam Schmidt

Senior Research Associte

By Ana Champeny

Vice President for Research
Download Report
All Aboard: How to Fairly Fund MTA Capital Investment Now (743.67 KB)
Footnotes
This assumes that all federal funding the MTA is hoping to secure could support the “Rebuild and Improve” work in the Capital Plan. Some of this federal funding, however, may be planned to support the expansion projects in the Capital Plan. In that case, the financing gap for the “Rebuild and Improve” portion of the Capital Plan is even larger. 
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, 2025-2029 Capital Plan: The Future Rides With Us (September 18, 2024), www.mta.info/document/151266.
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, MTA 2025 Adopted Budget: February Financial Plan 2025-2028 (February 2025), www.mta.info/document/165071.
Transport Workers Union Local 100 and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, 2023 Contract (May 30, 2023), www.twulocal100.org/sites/twulocal100.org/files/2023contract_0.pdf; and Metropolitan Transportation Authority, NYCT Operating Efficiencies (April 26, 2023), www.mta.info/document/109971.
This assumes that all federal funding the MTA is hoping to secure could support the “Rebuild and Improve” work in the Capital Plan. Some of this federal funding, however, may be planned to support the expansion projects in the Capital Plan. In that case, the financing gap for the “Rebuild and Improve” portion of the Capital Plan is even larger.
Of general State budget operating support, NYC contributed $408 million of $1,509 million, or 38.5 percent. Nora Nussbaum, “How Much Do City Taxpayers Really Contribute to the MTA?” Citizens Budget Commission Blog (February 21, 2020) https://cbcny.org/research/how-much-do-city-taxpayers-really-contribute-mta.
Steven Marcus and Patrick Orecki, Highest Costs, Middling Marks: New York School Spending and Results (Citizens Budget Commission, January 17, 2025), https://cbcny.org/research/highest-costs-middling-marks.
All leveraged sources assume a 16 to 1 ratio based on CBC analysis of MTA borrowing assumptions. 
The State fee, which varies based on the weight of a vehicle, ranges from $26 to $140. County or City fees range from $10 to $60. The MTA fee is $50. New York State Department of Motor Vehicles, “Passenger Vehicle Registration Fees, Use Taxes and Supplemental Fees” (accessed March 18, 2025), https://dmv.ny.gov/registration/passenger-vehicle-registration-fees-use-taxes-and-supplemental-fees#.
All leveraged sources assume a 16 to 1 ratio based on CBC analysis of MTA borrowing assumptions.
New York State Department of Taxation and Finance, “Real estate transfer tax” (February 12, 2025), https://www.tax.ny.gov/bus/transfer/rptidx.htm.
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, MTA 2023 Preliminary Budget: July Financial Plan 2024-2027 (Metropolitan Transportation Authority, July 2023), www.mta.info/document/115321.
All leveraged sources assume a 16 to 1 ratio based on CBC analysis of MTA borrowing assumptions.
New York State Department of Taxation and Finance, “Employers: metropolitan commuter transportation mobility tax (MCTMT)” (November 25, 2024), https://www.tax.ny.gov/bus/mctmt/emp.htm.
New York State Department of Taxation and Finance. “New York State Sales and Use Tax Rates by Jurisdiction” (March 1, 2025), https://www.tax.ny.gov/pdf/publications/sales/pub718.pdf.
All leveraged sources assume a 16 to 1 ratio based on CBC analysis of MTA borrowing assumptions.
Eric Goldwyn and others, “Projects,” Transit Costs Project (accessed March 18, 2025), https://transitcosts.com/projects/.
Ana Champeny, Focus, Fix, and Finance: How to Rightsize and Fund the 2025-2029 MTA Capital Program (Citizens Budget Commission, September 15, 2024), https://cbcny.org/research/focus-fix-and-finance.
This assumes a leverage ratio of 16, whereby $500 million a year supports $8 billion in borrowing over 30 years, assuming level-debt payments and interest rates of 4.67 percent.
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, MTA 2025 Adopted Budget: February Financial Plan 2025-2028 (February 2025), www.mta.info/document/165071.
Alex Armlovich, The Track to Fiscal Stability: Operations Reforms for the MTA (Citizens Budget Commission, May 25, 2021), https://cbcny.org/research/track-fiscal-stability.
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Report of the Blue Ribbon Panel on MTA Fare and Toll Evasion (May 2023), www.mta.info/document/111531.