TITLE: CityFHEPS Hits $1 Billion
URL: https://cbcny.org/research/cityfheps-hits-1-billion
ISSUED: 2025-02-24
PDF: https://cbcny.org/sites/default/files/media/files/CBCREPORT_FHEPS_02242025.pdf

REPORT  HOUSING
CityFHEPS Hits $1 Billion
NYC Cannot Voucher Its Way Out of the Housing Crisis
Press Release
Download Report
Print
Share
EXPAND TABLE OF CONTENTS
February 24, 2025
Contents
Executive Summary
Introduction
CityFHEPS Spending is Growing
CityFHEPS Does Not Save the City Money
CityFHEPS Growth Has At Best Kept the Shelter Census Steady
Transparency About Program Utilization and Outcomes is Lacking
New York City Cannot Voucher Its Way Out of the Affordability Crisis
Executive Summary 

The City Fighting Homelessness and Eviction Prevention Supplement (CityFHEPS) rental voucher program, launched in October 2018, consolidated several City rental subsidy programs into one. Public officials hoped to decrease the number of New Yorkers in shelters by placing them in permanent housing and potentially helping some avoid entering shelter in the first place. Some advocates also argued the voucher program would end up saving the City money in the long run, compared to the cost of shelter.  

Instead, New York City has created an entirely City-funded voucher program that already exceeds the total size of federally-funded housing programs in all other major U.S. cities. 

Rental housing vouchers require substantial subsidy and have not reduced the demand for shelter: the City cannot voucher its way out of the housing affordability crisis.  

Vouchers are not cheaper than shelter over the long term 

Serving the 52,000 existing CityFHEPS voucher holders will cost more than $1.1 billion in fiscal year 2025, more than twice the cost in fiscal year 2023. New vouchers issued through the end of June 2025 or rent increases for existing voucher holders would push the cost ever higher. The fiscal year 2026 CityFHEPs budget is just $519 million—52 percent less than the current year—a continued practice of radical underbudgeting that obfuscates the City’s fiscal plans and outlook. 

While these vouchers may save money at the start, their total cost far outpaces the cost of shelter over five years or longer. The fact is: Short-term savings are fleeting and vouchers cost more than shelter over time, even after accounting for households that will cycle back into shelter if they exit without subsidy.  

CityFHEPS does not save New York City money for two reasons: 

CityFHEPS expenses are recurring, while shelter is episodic: At $54.80 per day, CityFHEPS vouchers are cheaper than shelter beds on a nightly basis. But the cumulative costs of vouchers are much higher, even when accounting for households that cycle back to shelter. The average shelter stay is 15 months, while CityFHEPS vouchers, which cost the City on average $20,000 per household per year, extend for up to five years or longer, at the agency’s discretion.  

CityFHEPS is fully funded with City dollars, while shelter costs are shared with the federal and State governments: CityFHEPS shifts the cost of addressing homelessness from shelter and one-time assistance programs, whose costs are split among the City, State, and federal governments, to an entirely City-funded voucher program.  

After around two years, savings from the lower per-day voucher cost start to evaporate. By the end of the fifth year, CityFHEPS will cost the City 27 percent more than shelter for the typical single adult and 64 percent more for families. For the current 52,000 voucher holders, CityFHEPS will cost $1.8 billion more than shelter over five years. If households hold vouchers for longer than five years, the cost differential widens. 

Vouchers have not reduced the shelter population 

The number of voucher holders has increased significantly, reaching 52,000 households at the end of 2024. Despite this increase, the number of individuals in shelter, excluding asylum seekers, has held steady. The desired savings from a lower shelter census have not materialized.  

The City has not been transparent about the program 

The City does not regularly release even the most basic information about CityFHEPS. Unlike the federal Section 8 housing voucher program, the City does not report the total number of CityFHEPS vouchers or release any performance data on the program, such as renewal rates, how long it takes recipients to find an apartment, or median days to move into a unit. 

Hard choices are needed 

Hard choices about funding CityFHEPS loom. While delivering benefits to recipients, rental housing vouchers require substantial and ongoing public subsidy. The City faces very large budget gaps, making it a challenge to sustain the current level of spending, let alone the growing costs associated with increasing rents or additional vouchers. This does not even consider the potential expansion being pursued by the City Council.  

The City cannot voucher its way to housing affordability and will need to make decisions about the level of CityFHEPS spending that is appropriate and sustainable as part of a multi-pronged affordable housing strategy. Otherwise, paying for CityFHEPS may require cuts in other critical programs and services. Given spending constraints, the City should maximize the impact of CityFHEPS by targeting vouchers to households who will see the most benefits.

Download Executive Summary
Executive Summary: CityFHEPS Hits $1 Billion (8.4 MB)
Introduction

Since 2018, New York City has helped tens of thousands of homeless New Yorkers move into permanent housing with City Fighting Homelessness and Eviction Prevention Supplement (CityFHEPS) rental housing vouchers. CityFHEPS consolidated various existing voucher programs to streamline and simplify the City’s housing voucher programs.[1] The program’s rapid expansion, however, has also created a considerable recurring cost for the City. 

The cost of CityFHEPS has increased from $25 million in fiscal year 2019 to at least $1.1 billion in fiscal year 2025 due to growth in the number of vouchers and changes in program rules, such as increasing maximum allowable rents.[2] There are 52,000 vouchers currently being used and more are added every month.[3] This rapidly rising price tag reflects a stark reality: Rental housing vouchers, despite delivering benefits to recipients, require substantial ongoing subsidy.

This report examines why CityFHEPS: 

Has grown so rapidly in recent years; 
Does not save the City money compared to other homelessness prevention programs and shelter; 
Has at best kept the shelter census steady; and 
Lacks transparency about program utilization and outcomes. 

Hard choices about how to fund CityFHEPS loom. While delivering benefits to recipients, rental housing vouchers require substantial and ongoing public subsidy. The City faces very large budget gaps, making it a challenge to sustain the current level of spending, let alone the growing costs associated with increasing rents or additional vouchers. This does not even consider the potential expansion being pursued by the City Council. 

The City cannot voucher its way to housing affordability and will need to make decisions about the level of CityFHEPS spending that is appropriate and sustainable as part of a multi-pronged affordable housing strategy. Otherwise, paying for CityFHEPS spending growth may require cuts in other critical programs and services. Given spending constraints, the City should maximize the impact of CityFHEPS by targeting vouchers to households who will see the most benefits. 

CityFHEPS Spending is Growing

When Mayor Bill de Blasio launched CityFHEPS in fiscal year 2019, the City sought to streamline existing voucher programs and make it easier for people experiencing homelessness to get on a path toward self-sufficiency and permanent housing. But amidst the housing affordability crisis and record low rental vacancy rate, CityFHEPS has become a recurring subsidy for households with vouchers. Total expenditures for CityFHEPS more than quadrupled, from $155.0 million in fiscal year 2020 to $819.4 million in fiscal year 2024.[4] In addition to annual increases in the number of vouchers, the City Council passed legislation in 2021 that made each voucher more costly by switching to a higher maximum allowable rent based on the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Fair Market Rent. The City also amended rules on CityFHEPS time limits to allow more vouchers to be retained indefinitely.[5] Spending in fiscal year 2025 is now budgeted to exceed $1.1 billion as of the Fiscal Year 2026 Preliminary Budget, but the final cost will likely be even higher. The City had already committed $578 million for CityFHEPS in fiscal year 2025 as of December 2024.[6] Any additional vouchers issued through June 2025 will increase that total even further. (See Figure 1.)

The City has also budgeted less than half of the program’s current cost in fiscal year 2026. The current CityFHEPS fiscal year 2026 budget is just $519 million—$570 million less than the current fiscal year 2025 budget, before factoring in any additional program growth. 

CityFHEPS is the City’s primary program to help people move from shelter into permanent housing. In fiscal year 2024, 75 percent of households who exited shelter received a subsidy to help them secure housing, and CityFHEPS accounted for more than 90 percent of those subsidized exits. (See Figure 2.) In total, the City placed 13,402 formerly homeless households into housing with CityFHEPS in fiscal year 2024, a record number, while just 4,717 New Yorkers moved out of shelter without any subsidy. Cumulatively, 47,080 households have exited shelter with CityFHEPS vouchers between fiscal years 2019 and 2024.

What is CityFHEPS?

The CityFHEPS program is administered by the New York City Department of Social Services (DSS). Under CityFHEPS, DSS subsidizes the difference between 30 percent of a tenant’s income and their rent, up to a cap based on the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development’s Fair Market Rent (FMR) level. It's the same rent standard used for the federal Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher program. For example, under CityFHEPS, a family of three making $20,000 per year could rent an apartment for $2,750 per month. The family would pay $500 per month out of pocket with the City paying the remaining $2,250 directly to the landlord.

CityFHEPS vouchers are currently available to households who reside in shelter or are street homeless, on cash assistance, and have a gross income at or below 200 percent of the federal poverty limit. There are also work requirements, with exceptions for households with members who receive federal disability benefits, are 60 years of age or older, or are veterans. In limited circumstances, vouchers are also available to households not currently in shelter, called community referrals, including for veterans at risk of homelessness and referrals by Adult Protective Services (APS). Two-thirds of placements come from the shelter system, with the remaining one-third from community referrals.[7] 

CityFHEPS recipients are entitled to five years of rental assistance if they remain in good standing but can continue receiving benefits after the fifth year, subject to the availability of funding. While local law provides for extensions for households with a member who is at least 60 years of age or receives federal disability benefits, the City has said that no vouchers have been terminated because of time limits, as DSS can choose to extend eligibility at their discretion.[8] 

In 2023, the City Council passed a package of bills that would expand CityFHEPS eligibility to all households earning less than 50 percent of the Area Median Income who are potentially at risk of homelessness. The expansion was blocked by a N.Y. Supreme Court ruling, and the case remains on appeal. However, if implemented, the expansion would significantly increase the number of households receiving CityFHEPS. CBC estimates that as many as one-third of New York City renters meet the income requirements under the Council bills. 

Estimates of the fiscal impact of the expansion varied. The City Council’s fiscal impact statement estimated the cost at $10.6 billion over five years. The Office of Management and Budget pegged it at $17.2 billion. The State Comptroller’s midpoint estimate was $13.4 billion, though warned that it could cost as much as $36.0 billion or as little as $3.4 billion depending on implementation. In the nearly two years since those cost estimates were produced, CityFHEPS spending per household has increased 25 percent, from $16,000 to over $20,000 a year, in part due to the increase in allowable rent levels.[9] That rate of cost inflation would increase OMB’s estimate to as much as $21.5 billion over five years.

CityFHEPS Does Not Save the City Money

Some advocates argue that CityFHEPS could save the City money if it shortens or prevents homelessness. Rental housing vouchers do offer significant benefits to low-income households, including reductions in rent burden, overcrowding, and a reduced risk of becoming homeless.[10] The cost of rental assistance, however, is substantial, reaching $20,000 per household per year in New York City. 

In the long run, CityFHEPS increases the amount that the City spends on housing and homelessness for two reasons:

CityFHEPS replaces one-time or episodic spending on shelter stays or “one-shot” payments with recurring spending on a voucher that may or may not be time limited; and 
CityFHEPS shifts the costs of addressing the homelessness crisis from programs paid for in part by the State and federal governments to an entirely City-funded voucher program. 

As a result, even though vouchers may offer some initial savings compared to the cost of shelter or one-time rental assistance, the cumulative effect is recurring costs that very quickly overtake any upfront savings realized from shortening or avoiding shelter stays.

Temporary Assistance Shifts to Recurring Expense

Even with a right to shelter, New York City’s shelter system is intended to be a temporary respite, not a permanent housing solution. Over the past five years, the average length of stay in DHS shelters for both families with children and single adults was approximately 15 months.[11] 

Unlike shelter stays, CityFHEPS vouchers are longer-term obligations intended to help recipients secure permanent housing. While CityFHEPS vouchers are technically limited to five years, City officials can grant extensions at their discretion. As the first wave of CityFHEPS voucher holders hits their five-year anniversaries, the City appears to be opting to continue subsidizing those vouchers. Specific information is unknown, since the City has failed to publicly report how many CityFHEPS voucher holders have hit the five-year limit, or how many are exempt and continue to receive benefits after five years. 

Funding Shifts from State and Federal Governments to the City

New York City has a robust set of programs to help New Yorkers avoid becoming homeless and, under a settlement agreement, offers a right to shelter. Many of these programs are funded in part by the State and federal governments. (See Figure 3.)

In fiscal year 2022, before the influx of asylum seekers, the City paid 50 percent of the cost of family shelters and 90 percent of adult shelters, with the State and federal governments picking up the rest.[12] Similarly, the City paid 46 percent of the cost of one-time rental assistance, often referred to as one-shot deals, to households at risk of eviction. The remaining costs of one-shot deals were funded by the State through Safety Net Assistance or the federal government via Family Assistance.[13]

Homeless prevention programs and shelter costs are shared with the State and federal government, while CityFHEPS shifts all costs entirely to the City, most notably for families with children.

Short-Term Savings Are Fleeting

Vouchers are cheaper than shelter on a per-day basis, but they become substantially more expensive over time. In fiscal year 2024, the total cost per day was $270.51 for family shelter and $143.90 for single adult shelter; the City paid 46 percent for families ($123.36 per day) and 92 percent for single adults ($132.50 per day).[14] The average cost of CityFHEPS vouchers was approximately $54.79 per day, paid entirely by the City. (See Figure 4.)

However, when costs over a five-year period are compared, CityFHEPS costs the City more than shelter. Because shelter stays are temporary and CityFHEPS are recurring, any initial savings erode over time. CityFHEPS costs substantially more than shelter, even assuming that CityFHEPS vouchers are time limited to five years and that 19 percent of single adults and 12 percent of families cycle back into homeless shelters if they exit without subsidy.[15] By the end of the fifth year of eligibility, CityFHEPS will cost the City 27 percent more than shelter for single adults ($27,500 per household) and 64 percent more for families ($40,565 per household). (See Figure 5.) 

The current CityFHEPS population consists of approximately 22,300 single adult households and 29,600 family households.[16] Collectively, for those current voucher holders, CityFHEPS would cost an additional $1.8 billion over their first five years compared to the City-funded cost of shelter. If the CityFHEPS voucher holders retain their vouchers beyond five years, the cumulative cost would continue to increase over time.

CityFHEPS Growth Has At Best Kept the Shelter Census Steady

Excluding asylum seekers, 58,108 individuals resided in DHS shelters as of October 1, 2024, up from 51,144 in October 2023, though down slightly from 59,535 in September 2019.[17] Despite increased spending on vouchers to help individuals and families secure permanent housing, the number of individuals in shelter has held steady. The City has not seen any sustained incremental savings—shelter census and spending have not declined, while the City has seen rapid growth in the cost of CityFHEPS vouchers. 

It is possible that the shelter census would have been higher in the absence of CityFHEPS, as vouchers have helped some people move out of shelter faster than they otherwise would and reduced the likelihood that they return. However, household decisions about entering or exiting shelter are affected by the presence or absence of a voucher program, making it extremely difficult to project the population and shelter cost absent CityFHEPS.  

Transparency About Program Utilization and Outcomes is Lacking

Troublingly, the City does not provide any performance data on CityFHEPS, which makes it difficult to understand the scope of the program, its effectiveness at relieving New Yorkers’ housing burdens, or how well DSS administers the program. Despite the program’s size and growth, the Mayor’s Management Report (MMR) does not include a single indicator on CityFHEPS. 

Conversely, the MMR includes 16 metrics on the federal Section 8 housing voucher programs operated by the NYC Housing Authority (NYCHA) and the Department of Housing Preservation and Development (HPD), such as utilization rates, new vouchers issued, waiting lists, and median days to move into a unit. Metrics such as these are critical to effectively manage and evaluate the CityFHEPS program. 

While the City does not report the number of households with active CityFHEPS vouchers, the Department of Social Services has testified that, as of December 2024, there are 52,000 active voucher holders and 11,000 households with authorized vouchers who have yet to find an apartment.  In addition, 90 percent of active voucher holders typically renew their voucher each year.[18] The retention rate demonstrates that New Yorkers are unlikely to give up vouchers once they get them.

Scale of CityFHEPS in Context

With 52,000 active voucher holders, CityFHEPS is the second largest rental housing voucher program in the country, with roughly the same number of active vouchers as the Chicago Housing Authority (CHA)’s Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher program.[19] (See Figure 6.) CityFHEPS has more active voucher holders than the Section 8 voucher programs of Oakland, San Francisco, and Boston combined. And if this year’s rate of growth continues, CityFHEPS will solidify its position as the second largest voucher program in the country, behind only NYCHA’s Section 8 program. 

No other city in the country has a locally funded voucher program at any meaningful scale, in part because of the high cost of replicating a federally funded housing program without the fiscal resources of the federal government.

New York City Cannot Voucher Its Way Out of the Affordability Crisis

The scale of New York City’s affordability crisis requires a multi-pronged strategy. CityFHEPS rental housing vouchers can be a part of the solution, but affordable housing for the lowest income households requires deep subsidies and is difficult for any local government to fund at scale without State or federal support. Notably, even the federal Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher program, which enjoys bipartisan support, assists less than one-quarter of potentially eligible households.[20] 

The rapid expansion and rising cost of CityFHEPS should prompt the City to pause and take stock of the program’s cost-effectiveness. The City currently does not publicly track how CityFHEPS is used or how DSS administers the program. It also has not studied the cost effectiveness of CityFHEPS compared to other policies, or if its effectiveness varies by different groups. Ultimately, the City must make hard choices about the growth and sustainability of CityFHEPS before the program’s spending limits the City’s ability to fund other programs and services.

By Sean Campion

Director of Housing and Economic Development Studies
Download Report
Full Report: CityFHEPS Hits $1 Billion (8.73 MB)
Footnotes
CITYFHEPS replaced LINC, SEPS, and FEPS. See NYC Human Resources Administration, CityFHEPS (accessed January 23, 2025), https://www.nyc.gov/site/hra/help/cityfheps.page.
Sean Campion, “4 Fast FHEPS Facts,” Citizens Budget Commission Blog (May 8, 2023), https://cbcny.org/research/4-fast-fheps-facts.
Testimony of Molly Wasow Park, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Social Services, before the New York City Council Committee on General Welfare, Oversight - Administration of CityFHEPS, (January 27, 2025).
While the City has used non-recurring federal COVID aid to support the CityFHEPS program in recent years, those resources have been exhausted, and the program will be fully funded with City dollars going forward. CBC analysis of data from Office of the New York City Comptroller, Checkbook NYC (accessed November 22, 2024).
Sean Campion, “4 Fast FHEPS Facts,” Citizens Budget Commission Blog (May 8, 2023), https://cbcny.org/research/4-fast-fheps-facts.
Testimony of Molly Wasow Park, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Social Services, before the New York City Council Committee on General Welfare, Oversight - Administration of CityFHEPS, (January 27, 2025). CBC analysis of data from Office of the New York City Comptroller, Checkbook NYC (accessed November 22, 2024).
Testimony of Molly Wasow Park, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Social Services, before the New York City Council Committee on General Welfare, Oversight - Administration of CityFHEPS, (January 27, 2025).
Testimony of Molly Wasow Park, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Social Services, before the New York City Council Committee on General Welfare, Oversight - Administration of CityFHEPS, (January 27, 2025).
Sean Campion, “4 Fast FHEPS Facts,” Citizens Budget Commission Blog (May 8, 2023), https://cbcny.org/research/4-fast-fheps-facts.
NYU Furman Center, The Use of Housing Choice Vouchers in New York City (May 20, 2024), https://furmancenter.org/stateofthecity/view/the-use-of-housing-choice-vouchers-in-new-york-city.
City of New York Mayor’s Office of Operations, Mayor’s Management Report: Fiscal Year 2024: Department of Homeless Services (September 2024), https://www.nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/pdf/mmr2024/dhs.pdf.
City of New York, Mayor’s Office of Management and Budget, “Budget Function Analysis” (June 30, 2024), https://www.nyc.gov/site/omb/publications/finplan06-24.page#:~:text=Budget%20Function%20Analysis.
Claire Salant, How Much Has the City Spent on One-Time Homelessness Prevention Payments for Rental Arrears? (New York City Independent Budget Office, May 6, 2024), https://ibo.nyc.ny.us/iboreports/rental-arrears-payments-2024.pdf.
City of New York, Mayor’s Office of Operations, Mayor’s Management Report: Fiscal Year 2024: Department of Homeless Services (September 2024), https://www.nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/pdf/mmr2024/dhs.pdf; and City of New York, Mayor’s Office of Management and Budget, “Budget Function Analysis” (June 30, 2024), https://www.nyc.gov/site/omb/publications/finplan06-24.page#:~:text=Budget%20Function%20Analysis.
Households who exit shelter with a subsidy have much lower rates of returning to shelter within one year. In 2024, 19.1 percent of single adults who exited shelter without subsidy wound up returning to shelter within one year compared to 3.6 percent of those who exited with subsidy; for families with children the rates were 11.8 percent and 0.6 percent respectively. City of New York Mayor’s Office of Operations, Mayor’s Management Report: Fiscal Year 2024: Department of Homeless Services (September 2024), https://www.nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/pdf/mmr2024/dhs.pdf.
Testimony of Molly Wasow Park, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Social Services, before the New York City Council Committee on General Welfare, Oversight - Administration of CityFHEPS, (January 27, 2025).
Francesco Brindisi, Krista Olson, Jonathan Siegel, and Jason Bram, “New York by the Numbers Monthly Economic and Fiscal Outlook” (Office of the New York City Comptroller, November 13, 2024), https://comptroller.nyc.gov/newsroom/newsletter/new-york-by-the-numbers-monthly-economic-and-fiscal-outlook-no-95.
Testimony of Molly Wasow Park, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Social Services, before the New York City Council Committee on General Welfare, Oversight - Administration of CityFHEPS, (January 27, 2025).
CBC analysis of data from U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) Data Dashboard (accessed September 4, 2024; last updated May 2024), https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/public_indian_housing/programs/hcv/dashboard.
Jason DeParle, “As Need Rises, Housing Aid Hits Lowest Level in Nearly 25 Years” New York Times (December 19, 2023), https://www.nytimes.com/2023/12/19/us/politics/housing-aid-rent-costs.html.