AUGUST 2025
The Park 
Queens 
Deserves 
20 Ideas for Harnessing 
the Full Potential of 
Flushing Meadows Corona Park

The Park Queens Deserves: 20 Ideas for 
Harnessing the Full Potential of Flushing 
Meadows Corona Park is a publication of the 
Center for an Urban Future.
Researched and written by Jonathan Bowles 
and John Surico. Edited by Eli Dvorkin. 
Additional research by Ben Cresto and Rachel 
Neches. Designed by Sarah Tan. 
Center for an Urban Future (CUF) is a leading 
New York City–based think tank that generates 
smart and sustainable public policies to reduce 
inequality, increase economic mobility, and 
grow the economy. 

The Alliance for 
Flushing Meadows Corona Park
This report was made possible thanks to The 
Alliance for Flushing Meadows Corona Park. 
General operating support for the Center for an 
Urban Future has been provided by The Clark 
Foundation and the Altman Foundation. 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Jonathan Bowles
EDITORIAL & POLICY DIRECTOR
Eli Dvorkin
CHIEF OF STAFF
Stephanie Arevalo
SENIOR EDITOR
Dorian Block
DATA RESEARCHER
Rachel Neches 
SENIOR FELLOW FOR CLIMATE & OPPORTUNITY
John Surico
RESEARCH AND OPERATIONS ASSOCIATE
Sophia Tumolo
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Gifford Miller (Chairman) 
Margaret Anadu
Jonathan Bowles
Rafael E. Cestero
Russell Dubner
Garnesha Ezediaro
Susan Fine
Kyle Kimball
Katy Knight
Jessie Lazarus
David Lebenstein
Eric S. Lee 
Josh Moskowitz
Monisha Nariani
Max Neukirchen
Andrew Reicher 
Peter Schubert
John Siegal
Thomas Vecchione
Sherry Wang
Kate Wittels

The Park Queens Deserves 
20 Ideas for Harnessing the Full Potential of 
Flushing Meadows Corona Park
1
Make a major long-term capital 
commitment to FMCP that allows 
the park to reverse years of 
inadequate attention to its core 
infrastructure needs.
2
Prioritize future spending to address 
FMCP’s persistent flooding.
3
Consider an ‘FMCP Flood Fund’ to 
directly capture private revenue in 
the park for climate resiliency and 
mitigation upgrades.
4
Charge NYC DEP with repairing and 
replacing water mains and collapsed 
catch basins in FMCP.
5
Develop a 10-year strategic plan 
for FMCP that guides future 
investments and decision-making.
6
Develop ways to better integrate 
FMCP’s member institutions.
7
Expand Citi Bike and NYCDOT’s 
shared e-mobility pilot to the park.
8
Convert more of the park’s open 
spaces to multi-purpose fields 
and consider year-round usage 
of facilities.
9
Establish a signature event that 
brings visitors and attention to 
the park.
10
Cover one or more of the highways 
surrounding the park.
11
Daylight Flushing Creek to connect 
the park to Willets Point and the 
waterfront.
12
Reduce the amount of asphalt 
in FMCP.
13
Create dynamic new food options in 
the park by establishing a new 
vendor market filled with local food 
entrepreneurs.
14
Open a new sit-down café or 
restaurant outside the Queens 
Museum.
15
Explore opportunities to more 
fully harness Queens Theatre and 
its prized position in the park—
perhaps by launching free outdoor 
performances during summer 
evenings.
16
Create an ‘Emerald Necklace’ of 
seamless park connections in 
central and eastern Queens, with 
FMCP at the core.
17
Reimagine the entrances to the 
park, including a bridge over 
Flushing Creek.
18
Expand the NYC Ferry system to 
Willets Point, in exchange for pier 
upgrades.
19
Redesign the Playground for 
All Children. 
20
Make better use of the area 
surrounding the New York 
State Pavilion.

THE PARK QUEENS DESERVES
1
FLUSHING MEADOWS CORONA PARK (FMCP) IS ARGUABLY 
New York City’s most underappreciated important park. 
It is the city’s fourth most visited park—behind on ly 
Central Park, Bryant Park, and Prospect Park—yet Flushing 
Meadows has long struggled to attract even a fraction of the 
public and private investment as other heavily trafficked 
parks. Although it was a symbol of urban modernity when 
it was /f_irst built as part of the 1939 World’s Fair, today 
much of the park feels dated, marred by deteriorati ng 
infrastructure, routine /f_looding, and faded monuments. 
And while it is regularly used by hundreds of thousands 
of Queens residents who have no other comparable public 
space option, it has surprisingly few green open spaces to 
accommodate the insatiable demand for soccer, ecua-volley, 
cricket, cookouts, and many other activities that today 
too often take place on modest stretches of grass—o r 
dirt—between trees or adjacent to ball/f_ields. 
Despite its challenges, FMCP is teeming with 
opportunity. It is the beating heart of Queens—a veritable 
backyard for residents of several of the city’s densest and 
most diverse communities, and a widely recognized icon 
of New York. On most weekends outside of the coldest 
winter months, the park becomes a hive of activity, with 
nearly every inch of green and open space used for picnics, 
children’s birthday parties, Zumba classes, tai chi, dance 
rehearsals, skate sessions, and running clubs. From canoe 
lessons and /f_itness programs for older adults to salsa 
dancing, open air movie nights, and unique community 
festivals, the park draws New Yorkers who depend on its 
vast acreage for recreation, connection, and well-being. 
It is home to /f_ive cultural institutions, two lakes, two 
major sports arenas, a golf course, and a marina. And it 
welcomes more than one million visitors for the U.S. Open 
and tens of thousands more for the Hong Kong Dragon 
Boat Festival, Queens Day, Governors Ball, and countless 
graduation parties, quinceañeras, Eid celebrations, and 
other family gatherings.
But it could be so much more. FMCP has the 
potential to be one of the most dynamic urban parks in 
the country—and, crucially, a far more attractive a nd 
inclusive open space and recreational resource for the 
mostly low- and middle-income New Yorkers who use it 
on a regular basis. It could become a national model for 
equitable investment in public space—offering high-quality 
amenities, vibrant programming, connections among 
diverse neighborhoods, and safe, resilient infrastructure 
that uplifts the communities it serves. 
“Flushing Meadows Corona Park is the ultimate 
crown jewel of our borough—a con/f_luence of countless 
cultures, languages and cuisines in the shadow of Queens’ 
most historic landmarks and major sports stadiums,” 
says Queens Borough President Donovan Richards. 
“However, there are certainly plenty of upgrades an d 
improvements that are needed throughout Flushing 
Meadows, as we work to cement its status as both th e 
premiere neighborhood park for our neighbors and 
an international attraction for visitors from aroun d 
the world.” 
To realize its considerable promise, however, the park 
will require a new level of attention and civic focus on the 
future of this singular asset for Queens, bold thin king 
about what the park can become, and imaginative ideas not 
only for park programming but also for generating revenue. 
Perhaps even importantly, it will need sustained public 
and private investment at a scale not seen in decades. Since 
2012, only $100 million in city funds has been invested 
in the park, with over half of that—or $56 million, in 
total—going to a single project, the restoration of the New 
York State Pavilion, which holds little material bene/f_it to 
park goers. Although federal funds for FEMA projects in 
the wake of Superstorm Sandy have added to the tota l 
investment, the park receives a fraction of the dollars it 
needs for basic upkeep. For example, it has been estimated 
that the sorely needed reconstruction of the Passerelle 
Pedestrain Bridge, which brings visitors from the Mets-
Willets Point subway station to the park, and necessary 
upgrades to the park’s water and electrical systems would 
cost a combined $650 million. 
But the challenges at FMCP stretch far beyond just 
disinvestment. /T_he park’s layout remains an artifact of 
the past, more /f_itting as a fairground than for open space 
uses. A series of roads and highways surround and c ut 
directly through the park, making it less friendly to access 
or traverse on foot or bike. At the same time, buildings once 
used for the World’s Fair, like the Queens Museum and 
Queens /T_heatre, don’t feel well integrated with the park 
experience. Indeed, multiple people interviewed for this 
report said that the park often feels more like a collection 
of facilities on a campus than a magni/f_icent public park. 
And it can often feel like a mission to /f_ind a functional 
bathroom or a bite to eat, with so few options available 
for park visitors. 
1

22
All of the opportunities and challenges for FMCP 
take on fresh urgency as a new soccer stadium and major 
redevelopment take shape at nearby Willets Point—an d 
as policymakers weigh a proposal for a casino next to Citi 
Field.
/T_his report aims to spark the conversation about what 
should be done. It offers 20 concrete ideas for more fully 
harnessing the park’s enormous potential, addressing the 
park’s biggest challenges, and making it an even better, 
more vibrant, and more sustainable resource for residents 
across the borough and beyond. /T_he 20 ideas were informed 
by more than two dozen interviews with parks and open 
space experts, community leaders from across Queens, 
regular users of the park, landscape architects, ur ban 
planners, and local policymakers—and they include both 
big visions for the park’s future as well as smaller ideas 
that can be implemented in the shorter term. 
Flushing Meadows Corona Park has the potential 
to be one of the most dynamic urban parks in the 
country—and, crucially, a far more attractive and 
inclusive open space and recreational resource for 
the mostly low- and middle-income New Yorkers who 
use it on a regular basis.
20 IDEAS FOR HARNESSING THE FULL POTENTIAL OF FLUSH ING MEADOWS CORONA PARK

THE PARK QUEENS DESERVES
3
1
Cover one or more of the highways 
surrounding the park.
2
Daylight Flushing Creek to connect 
the park to Willets Point and the 
waterfront.
3
Reduce the amount of asphalt 
in FMCP.
4
Reimagine the entrances to the 
park, including a bridge over 
Flushing Creek.
5
Expand the NYC Ferry system 
to Willets Point, in exchange for 
pier upgrades.
6
Redesign the Playground for 
All Children.
7
Make better use of the area 
surrounding the New York State 
Pavilion.
1
2
3
6 7
4
5
Flushing Meadows Corona Park 
(FMCP) Map Key

THE PARK QUEENS DESERVES
4
SINCE 2012, ONLY AROUND $100 MILLION IN CITY CAPITAL 
dollars have been invested into Flushing Meadows Corona 
Park (FMCP), a shockingly low amount for one of New 
York City’s most iconic and highly visited parks, and one 
with hundreds of millions of dollars in unaddressed—and 
not yet funded—infrastructure needs. Of that sum, more 
than $56.7 million has been allocated to a single project—
reconstructing portions of the New York State Pavilion 
Observation Towers—an allocation which will not eve n 
enable those structures to return to public use. (/T_he city 
recently committed $146.2 million to the reconstruction 
of the Passerelle Pedestrian Bridge in its ten-year capital 
plan, but the funds have yet to be allocated—and th at 
sum may not even cover the full cost of that one project.)
FMCP’s enormous backlog of unmet capital needs 
stems from its unique origin story. /T_he park was built on 
a former wetland and ash dump to host the 1939–1940 
New York’s World Fair and then expanded for the 1964 
edition. Its core infrastructure—from disintegrating water 
and sewer lines to ancient electrical systems—dates back 
almost a century, with facilities and installations that were 
meant to be temporary. Since then, there has been n o 
meaningful effort to transform this former fairground 
into a full-/f_ledged /f_lagship park and prepare it for modern 
needs or usage.
Some of the city’s other signature parks—including 
Central Park and Prospect Park—have been able to 
raise millions in private dollars for capital investments 
from their affluent users and major corporate and 
institutional donors. For instance, the Central Par k 
Conservancy raised more than $100 million in private 
funding to completely transform the Lasker Rink and 
Pool site on the Harlem Meer. Flushing Meadows lacks 
even a fraction of the same fundraising capacity and is 
almost wholly reliant on city and state funding fro m 
a patchwork of different elected officials, each one 
responsible for just a portion of the overall landm ass. 
But the public capital dollars committed to FMCP 
have been inadequate to keep pace with its growing 
infrastructure needs. 
It’s time for city leaders to reverse the park’s chronic 
underfunding and make a long-term commitment to 
upgrading the park’s infrastructure.
1. Make a major long-term capital commitment to Flushing 
Meadows Corona Park that allows the park to reverse years 
of inadequate attention to its core infrastructure needs.

5
20 IDEAS FOR HARNESSING THE FULL POTENTIAL OF FLUSH ING MEADOWS CORONA PARK
IN ADDITION TO LAUNCHING A MAJOR NEW CAPITAL 
program for Flushing Meadows Corona Park (FMCP), city 
leaders and parks officials should prioritize upgrades to 
the park’s core infrastructure—and especially to projects 
that address the park’s near-constant /f_looding. Very little 
of the approximately $100 million in city capital funding 
allocated to the park since 2012 has gone to shore up 
the unsexy infrastructure that is so vital to the p ark’s 
everyday functioning, from electrical systems and g as 
lines to the park’s deteriorating water mains and catch 
basins. /T_hat needs to change. 
FMCP faces an array of complex challenges today, but 
none are as consequential as the /f_looding that regularly 
occurs and renders large swaths of the park unusable for 
days after even minor rainfall. Sited on what was once 
marshland, the park is deluged with water after eve n 
a slight rainfall, and its limited and aging stormw ater 
management and drainage systems are increasingly 
unable to handle worsening storms. 
Practically every interview for this report included 
a story about the park’s chronic /f_looding. For days 
after most rainstorms—adding up to several months 
each year—giant puddles cover large sections of the 
path around Meadow Lake, making it difficult, if not 
impossible, for parkgoers to run, cycle, or walk through 
one of its most picturesque areas. Elsewhere, green spaces 
ideal for picnics and volleyball are often waterlog ged 
for days, and one baseball diamond remains submerged 
for much of the season. Drainage is so poor, says John 
Wang, creator of the Queens Night Market, that just a 
tenth of an inch of rain /f_loods its site, thus cance lling 
the weekend event.
“A little rain puts parts of the park, particularly near 
and around Meadow Lake, out of commission,” says 
Arthi Krishnamoorthy, senior principal at the prominent 
architecture studio TenBerke, who lives near the pa rk 
and serves on the board of the Queens Museum, one of 
the park’s tenant institutions. “Improved drainage and 
natural water management in these areas would keep 
them accessible to park-users when the sun comes out 
again.”
As a natural catch basin for central and eastern 
Queens, the park has faced persistent pressure to 
retain water since Flushing Creek was buried during its 
development years ago.
Adding to the problem, the water mains underneath 
the park are remnants from the 1939 and 1964/65 
World’s Fairs, and all have thoroughly deteriorated. /T_hey 
break regularly, resulting in leaks throughout the park. 
On a recent site visit, water was gushing up through the 
asphalt at multiple locations in the park. Four wat er 
mains are connected to the Queens /T_heatre, but only one 
still functions. “We don’t have the luxury of treating these 
risks as hypotheticals anymore. We’ve already faced real 
consequences from our reliance on aging infrastructure,” 
says Jay Rogers, the /T_heatre’s director of operations.
Despite the recurring /f_looding issues, there has never 
been a meaningful city or state effort to upgrade th e 
park’s inadequate and overstressed water and drainage 
systems. Very little of the $100 million invested in FMCP 
since 2012 has helped address these critical challenges. 
/T_he partial reconstruction of the New York State Pavilion 
Observation Towers for more than $56.7 million stands 
out as a particularly unwise use of the city’s limited capital 
resources, given the park’s extensive unmet needs. /T_he 
city has also allocated tens of millions to reconst ruct 
the Olmstead Center, the headquarters of NYC Parks’ 
capital division, which serves an important functio n 
for the agency but is not an investment in the park that 
directly bene/f_its parkgoers.
/T_he cost of /f_ixing the park’s plumbing issues is likely 
$80 to $100 million, while developing comprehensive 
/f_ixes to its drainage issues would be hundreds of millions 
of dollars more. Other signature parks, like Central Park 
and Brooklyn Bridge Park, have forged public-privat e 
partnerships to pay for these core infrastructure costs. 
For example, in the late 1990s, Central Park’s Grea t 
Lawn received a $71.5 million public-private investment 
2. Prioritize future spending on projects that address 
Flushing Meadows Corona Park’s persistent flooding. 

THE PARK QUEENS DESERVES
6
to install a 31,000-foot underground drainage and 
irrigation system. But FMCP has yet to secure similar 
support: it isn’t surrounded by wealthy neighbors who 
can help fundraise for renovations. Meanwhile, even the 
modest concession revenue generated in the park goes 
back to the city’s General Fund.
It’s long overdue for city leaders to address the 
park’s persistent /f_looding problem. /T_he next mayoral 
administration should provide at least $150 million in 
new funding—perhaps with private sector companies 
that are headquartered in or do signi/f_icant business 
in Queens raising an additional $20 million to $50 
million—so that the park can put a serious dent in this 
problem through the development of modern drainage 
infrastructure, including bioswales, permeable pathways, 
daylighted streams, retention basins, cisterns, and 
restored wetlands.
3. Consider a ‘Flushing Meadows Corona Park Flood Fund’ 
to directly capture private revenue in the park for climate 
resiliency and mitigation upgrades.
IN ADDITION TO PROVIDING SIGNIFICANT NEW CAPITAL 
funding for Flushing Meadows Corona Park (FMCP), 
city leaders should explore innovative ways to harness 
the park’s immense value to help meet its growing 
needs. A new ‘FMCP Flood Fund,’ which would act as 
an investment trust for the park, could allow it to tap 
into a number of different revenue streams to pay for a 
complete modernization. 
Alan Van Capelle, the executive director of the 
Friends of the High Line who grew up visiting the park, 
says the most immediate place to start is major liv e 
events held there. “If you rent out the space or ha ve 
dedicated spaces for concerts, you should make money 
off of that,” he says. /T_he agreement between the City of 
New York and /T_he High Line, he notes, denotes how often 
the sections of the park can be rented out for private 
use. One event alone, he says, has the potential to earn 
hundreds of thousands of dollars that the park gets to 
keep for maintenance and upkeep. 
But while FMCP has bene/f_ited from occasional 
contributions from operators who earn revenue in the 
park, it lacks the same ability to harness direct, recurring 
funding from revenue-generating events. As it stands, 
no dollars return to FMCP from the ground leases for 
the USTA Tennis Center and Citi Field, even though 
park staff is often in charge of cleanup before and after 
events enjoyed by over a million attendees each year. 
/T_he organizers behind Governors Ball committed 
to a $1 donation per ticket sale, which raised almo st 
$100,000 for the Alliance for Flushing Meadows Corona 
Park in 2024. But that was done voluntarily, since the 
permit fee, which is over $1 million, went back to the 
city’s General Fund. “It just frustrated me so much that 
the park sees nothing from our event, even though 
we wouldn’t be here without it,” says Tom Russell, the 
organizer of the festival. 
A new ‘FMCP Flood Fund’ should be established 
through an agreement between the City of New York 
and the Alliance for Flushing Meadows Corona Park, 
with the goal of allocating a portion of ground lea se 
payments from Citi Field, the USTA Tennis Center, and 
the forthcoming soccer stadium in Willets Point—as well 
as permit fees from major events—directly back into the 
park’s upkeep. /T_his should include revenue generated 
by the potential siting of a casino in the area, namely 
through live events held there.
Once the Fund is established, officials could get 
creative: in interviews, park stakeholders suggested ideas 
like camping “under the stars,” races and competitions, 
and paid tours of World’s Fair attractions. A modes t 
portion of sales from major events held in the park—
and from private institutions within the park, like the 
Queens Museum, Queens /T_heatre, and Terrace on the 
Park, a catering hall on park premises—could return to 

7
20 IDEAS FOR HARNESSING THE FULL POTENTIAL OF FLUSH ING MEADOWS CORONA PARK
the Fund. To offset their impact on /f_looding, buildings 
and parking lot operators on or near the park could be 
subject to a “stormwater fee” that, in return, pays for 
the construction and maintenance of bioswales, green 
medians, and other green infrastructure.
“It’s not just one in/f_lux of money,” says Matt 
Grunbaum, an associate at Field Operations, a leading 
landscape architecture and urban design /f_irm that is 
currently studying an area adjacent to the park. “Yo u 
need multiple streams for the level of maintenance and 
operations the park truly needs.” A trust for repai rs, 
Grunbaum says, could help the city leverage other 
available dollars, too, including state and federal grants 
and philanthropic matching programs. 
For a park system as vast and varied as FMCP , 
Sanjukta Sen, an associate partner at Field Operations 
who has led design teams for major urban parks projects 
both in the city and nationwide, suggested that funding 
strategies to fund /f_lood mitigation efforts could consider 
segmenting the park into smaller parcels to streamline 
both public and private fundraising. “You want to 
identify 18 or 20 projects that can be phased, so y ou 
can understand which ones the state’s Department 
of Environmental Conservation (DEC), the U.S. Army 
Corps of Engineers (USACE), or the city’s Department 
of Environmental Protection (DEP) could help pay for,” 
Sen says. “It ends up becoming this Venn diagram of 
different sources. You could really lean into a community 
development fund, or some more diverse forms of city, 
state and federal funding.”
It’s not just one influx of money. You need multiple 
streams for the level of maintenance and operations 
the park truly needs.
MATT GRUNBAUM 
Associate, Field Operations

THE PARK QUEENS DESERVES
8
4. Charge NYC DEP with repairing and replacing water mains 
and collapsed catch basins in Flushing Meadows Corona 
Park (FMCP).
WHEN A WATER MAIN BURSTS IN DOWNTOWN 
FLUSHING or along Roosevelt Avenue in Corona, or 
most anywhere else across the /f_ive boroughs, the city’s 
Department of Environment Protection is responsible 
for /f_ixing the problem. DEP has the staff, the resources, 
and the expertise to address those often-complicated 
water infrastructure challenges. But when those same 
issues come up inside of the boundaries of FMCP , DEP 
essentially throws up its arms and says, “that’s yo ur 
problem.” 
Not surprisingly, however, NYC Parks does not have 
sufficient teams, resources, or expertise to undertak e 
this work. /T_he small team of NYC Parks staff working 
at FMCP are focused on their core mission: to steward 
the park and provide basic day-to-day maintenance. So, 
when there is a need to replace a water main, repair a 
collapsed catch basin, or simply deal with a leaky hydrant, 
the park typically needs to hire a contractor to do the 
work, a process that can lead to lengthy delays and too 
often runs into the challenge of insufficient maintenance 
or capital funding. 
Although DEP has similar policies regarding 
other areas of parkland, FMCP feels it more acutely 
than most because of its extensive aging underground 
infrastructure, water-saturated location, and limit ed 
resources. Indeed, there are currently several spots in 
the park where water is constantly bubbling up through 
the pavement because of broken or leaky water mains. 
It’s time for the mayor to direct DEP to take more 
responsibility for the water system that runs through 
FMCP . DEP’s annual budget ($1.7 billion) is nearly three 
times that of the entire NYC Parks budget. It’s also in 
the interest of New Yorkers. Doing so will not only save 
the park the cost and headache of trying to coordinate 
this complex work, but also, it will go a long way to 
ensuring that parks amenities, like water fountains and 
public restrooms are working properly and help the park 
mitigate /f_looding. 
/T_he park experiences similar turf issues with other 
agencies, namely the city Department of Transportation 
(NYCDOT). For example, there are several roadways 
that operate in the park. But when potholes emerge 
or the roads wear down to the point where they 
need resurfacing, the park staff is expected to do i t 
themselves—despite lacking the expertise or resources 
of NYCDOT. 
Fortunately, there have been signs of renewed 
collaboration. Cloudburst, a new initiative between 
NYCDEP and NYC Parks, is converting the parking lot 
adjacent to New York Hall of Science (NYSCI) into an 
absorbent /f_loodscape. /T_he Adams administration also 
smartly created the Office of the Public Realm to help 
wade through agency silos. 
But to effect lasting change, more must be done 
by the mayor to reassign relevant infrastructure 
responsibilities within Flushing Meadows Corona Park 
to better-resourced sister agencies including NYCDEP 
and NYCDOT.

9
20 IDEAS FOR HARNESSING THE FULL POTENTIAL OF FLUSH ING MEADOWS CORONA PARK
5. Develop a 10-year strategic plan for Flushing Meadows 
Corona Park (FMCP) that guides future investments and 
decision-making.
IT WILL BE DIFFICULT TO SEIZE ON THE MANY 
opportunities facing FMCP and address its longstanding 
challenges without a strategic plan for park’s futu re. 
A well-structured strategic plan would provide an 
aspirational yet achievable vision that helps estab lish 
what the park’s future priorities should be. As suc h, 
it would help guide decisions about the investments 
and projects the park should—and should not—be 
undertaking. 
Given FMCP’s limited budget, parks administrators 
will always need to make difficult decisions about where 
to invest, what projects to prioritize, and how to allocate 
staff. With a strategic plan, those decisions will be made 
with more clarity and intention—and a more speci/f_ic 
rationale that can be shared with the park’s stakeholders 
and visitors. It will help park staff say no to potential 
projects that don’t align with their strategic priorities 
and yes to those that do. 
While the area has undertaken elements of a 
strategic plan in the past—including a community-
focused effort spearheaded by the Queens Museum 
and the Parks Department in 2014, a signage plan, and 
a climate-resiliency plan—there is no current, full -
scale, comprehensive strategic plan for the entire park 
developed with strong backing from City Hall. /T_his new 
plan should incorporate elements of the proposals that 
have come before, while including speci/f_ic infrastructure 
needs, revenue-generating mechanisms, funding 
commitments, interagency collaboration, and a vision 
for the future of the park’s diverse landscapes, facilities, 
opportunities, and challenges.
“/T_hat was the /f_irst thing I did when I got to the 
Central Park Conservancy,” says Betsy Smith, the 
conservancy’s president and CEO. “We created a strategic 
plan for use of park and care of park. /T_hat was 6 years 
ago. It has really helped us focus. It was aspirati onal 
for us. It drove the decisions we’ve made. It gives you a 
vision and gets people excited.”

THE PARK QUEENS DESERVES
10
6. Develop ways to better integrate Flushing Meadows 
Corona Park (FMCP)’s member institutions.
IN INTERVIEWS FOR THIS REPORT, PARKS AND OPEN 
space experts across the city raised one theme again and 
again: FMCP , more than any other park in New York 
City, often feels less like a cohesive park and more like a 
collection of separate facilities—a campus of disconnected 
buildings and attractions.
Although the park’s member institutions contribute 
greatly to its vibrancy and appeal, we repeatedly h eard 
that their sheer number—and the lack of integration 
between them—can undermine the park’s role as a uni/f_ied, 
accessible space for the communities that rely on it most.
/T_he park is home to a remarkable range of institutions: 
Queens Museum, Queens /T_heatre, Queens Zoo, the New 
York Hall of Science, Terrace on the Park, World’s Fair 
Marina, the USTA Billie Jean King National Tennis Center, 
Flushing Meadows Pitch & Putt, the Flushing Meadows 
Corona Park Aquatic Center, the Al Oerter Recreatio n 
Center, and Citi Field. Connecting all these assets into a 
more cohesive whole is no small task.
One critical need is to develop and implement cohesive 
way/f_inding system, lighting, and maps that make it 
easier for visitors to navigate the park—a long-ove rdue 
investment that is actually funded but has been mired in 
the bureaucratic process. Others suggested designing new 
“connective tissue” within the park: landscaped gathering 
spaces, shaded seating areas, or amenity-/f_illed picnic 
zones that draw people between major destinations and 
encourage them to linger in the park itself, not just travel 
from one building to the next.
A strategic plan could also include a focus on aligning 
programming across institutions—whether through 
coordinated festivals, joint ticketing initiatives, or shared 
public events—to reinforce the idea of FMCP as a uni/f_ied 
cultural and recreational destination. Similarly, rethinking 
the park’s digital footprint, with a central platform or app 
that ties together events, services, and way/f_inding tools 
across facilities, could help knit the park together in the 
public’s imagination.
Most of all, FMCP needs a vision that puts the park at 
the center—not as a backdrop to other destinations, but as 
the connective foundation that provides context to them 
all. One option worth considering is dedicated elec tric 
tram service, with stops in front of key institutions and 
attractions and potentially direct connections to Corona 
and Flushing subway stations.
7. Expand Citi Bike and NYCDOT’s shared e-mobility pilot 
to the park. 
IF ANY PLACE IN NEW YORK IS TAILOR-MADE FOR BIKE-SHARE 
(or scooter-share), it is Flushing Meadows Corona Park 
(FMCP). /T_hat’s because most of the park’s entrances are 
hundreds of yards or further from the park’s primary 
destinations. For example, from the Mets-Willets Point 
subway station—the place where a majority of those who 
don’t drive to the park arrive—it is a 15-minute walk to 
the Unisphere and a 28-minute walk to the snack stand on 
northern edge of Meadow Lake, according to Google Maps. 
Similarly, it is a 20-minute walk from the New York Hall 
of Science to the Fountain of the Planets. And for those 
entering the park on Jewel Avenue, at the south end of 
Meadow Lake, it is a 39-minute stroll to the Unisphere. 
It takes even longer to reach the park from more densely 
populated sections of the surrounding neighborhoods, 
including downtown Flushing and Corona.
Citi Bike, the city’s hugely popular bike-share system, 
is widely used in many of the city’s other major parks—

11
20 IDEAS FOR HARNESSING THE FULL POTENTIAL OF FLUSH ING MEADOWS CORONA PARK
including Central Park (which has 20 docking stations 
surrounding the park), Prospect Park (which has 5 docking 
stations on the park’s perimeter), and Van Cortlandt Park. 
But it is still not an option in Flushing Meadows Corona 
Park. /T_here are only three docks along 111th Street, at 
the park’s western edge.
Changing this and bringing bike-share or scooter-share 
to Flushing Meadows Corona Park would greatly improve 
mobility options in the park. It also has the poten tial 
to boost attendance at some of the park’s institutions, 
including the Queens Museum and Queens /T_heatre. “We 
are tucked inside the park, and expanding options for 
how patrons get to the theater would certainly bene/f_it 
our community members,” says Taryn Sacramone, the 
executive director of the Queens /T_heatre. Sally Tallant, the 
president and executive director of the Queens Museum, 
adds, “Citi Bikes in the park would de/f_initely help.” 
/T_here have been previous calls to bring bike-share 
to Flushing Meadows Corona Park. In 2008, NYC 
Parks published a ‘strategic framework plan’ to usher 
Flushing Meadows Corona Park into the 21st century.1 
One proposal pushed for a little-known idea then called 
bike-share, with systems emerging in cities like London 
and Paris. /T_he park, the study said, is ideal for cycling, 
with /f_lat inclines and wide boulevards, and its vastness 
offers abundant space for stations. (In fact, a study on 
the park after the 1964 World’s Fair /f_loated what would 
have been the /f_irst-ever bike lane in a city park. It never 
came to fruition.)
In 2013, the city launched Citi Bike, which has 
amassed over 125,000 regular rides and expanded to 
four of the /f_ive boroughs.2 But over ten years later, that 
system still does not extend through the park. /T_he city 
should work with Lyft, which owns Citi Bike, to quickly 
change this and make its bikes available on all cor ners 
of the park. 
In the last few years, the system has arrived at 
the park’s doorsteps, with Citi Bike now available at 
the entrances in Corona, and in front of Citi Field. /T_he 
city also recently announced that the next phase of 
expansion will bring stations further down the park ’s 
western edge. 3 But still, there are no stations located 
within the park, or towards Forest Hills or Flushin g. 
Docks should be installed on major thoroughfares and at 
key access points, like transit stops, major destinations, 
and entrances, so users can traverse the park and visit 
other areas. 
Another mode has also recently arrived east of the 
park: the city’s shared e-scooter pilot, where residents can 
access dockless vehicles at on-street ‘parking’ locations 
using their smartphones. Within a few months, the 
program’s three providers—Veo, Bird, and Lime—saw 
almost half a million rides the /f_irst six months of service, 
in ‘transit desert’ neighborhoods like Murray Hill and 
Jamaica.4 (/T_he pilot in the east Bronx has been equally 
successful.) But its boundaries stop at the entrance to 
Flushing Meadows Corona Park.
In addition to Citi Bike, NYCDOT should expand 
its shared e-scooter program to cover the park. /T_he 
geo-corralled ‘spots’ and renewed commitments to 
maintenance from the providers will help to ensure that 
the vehicles are not sprawled carelessly along streets and 
sidewalks—a common criticism. /T_he city should also 
consider amending its rules for these vehicles on p ark 
roads; otherwise, riders will be technically unable to utilize 
the park’s expanding greenway system.
Together with Citi Bike, these micro-mobility 
‘networks’ promote short trips at low cost, allowing users 
to explore further reaches without a car. As the ci ty’s 
2008 plan showed, Flushing Meadows Corona Park is 
ideal to traverse on two wheels. /T_he city should make it 
easy to do so.
We are tucked inside the park, and expanding 
options for how patrons get to the theater would 
certainly benefit our community members.
TARYN SACARAMONE 
Executive Direction, Queens Theatre

THE PARK QUEENS DESERVES
12
8. Convert more of the park’s open spaces to multi-purpose 
fields and consider year-round usage of facilities.
AT ITS CORE, FLUSHING MEADOWS CORONA PARK 
(FMCP), in 2025, is a park for recreation. Every day, many 
thousands of park goers come to play soccer, volleyball, 
cricket, and many other sports. Many others swim or 
skate in the Flushing Meadows Corona Park Aquatic 
Center & Ice Rink, play tennis at the USTA tennis courts, 
or play golf at the pitch and putt course. Play is, perhaps, 
the primary purpose of the park today—a testament t o 
how the grounds have evolved over time to meet more 
modern and cultural demands.
But the park struggles to adapt and maintain its 
landscape and age-old infrastructure to the ways visitors 
are using it today. A recent site visit witnessed more than 
a dozen impromptu volleyball games taking place—not 
on specially designated volleyball courts but on sm all 
patches of grass and dirt, often wedged between trees 
or in a bit of open space next to a restroom. Simil ar 
scenes play out regularly in other sports, with pickup 
soccer games and cricket matches taking place on dirt 
patches between turf /f_ields or in the out/f_ields of two 
adjacent baseball /f_ields. 
/T_here simply aren’t enough spaces to meet today’s 
demand for play. At the same time, there are some spaces 
in the park—such as the two baseball /f_ields at the southern 
end of Meadow Lake—that are rarely used today. 
City leaders should fund a reimagining—and 
overhaul—of the park’s existing open spaces to more 
closely re/f_lect how residents are using them, and work 
to convert them to multi-purpose /f_ields that can be 
enjoyed by all.
First, the city, along with the Alliance for Flushing 
Meadows Corona Park, should lead a robust community 
engagement effort to more accurately pinpoint how 
exactly residents of neighboring communities 
(particularly Corona, Jackson Heights and Flushing) 
are using the park, and what could be added that either 
builds upon what’s already happening—like Ecua-volley,5 
for example—or /f_ills a gap that doesn’t currently exist 
to accommodate them. /T_hat outreach could also help 
answer a key question for the park: are the existin g 
structures being utilized to the greatest extent possible? 
/T_hese answers will help determine what investments the 
park should make next.
/T_he mayor should direct additional capital dollars 
to support a targeted conversion of paved roads and 
pathways and some existing /f_ields and open spaces to 
multi-sport courts and other more /f_lexible terrain types, 
which would allow parkgoers with different cultures and 
interests to enjoy the same space in numerous ways. 
/T_his reinvention of existing space would better prepare 
Flushing Meadows Corona Park to accommodating 
the growing and evolving needs of its users and lessen 
maintenance costs in the future. 
“/T_his is really about turning it from the leftover 
World’s Fair infrastructure to an actual functioning park,” 
says Andrew Hollweck, a former deputy commissioner at 
the Department for Design and Construction. (Hollweck 
also serves as a board member on the Alliance for 
Flushing Meadows Corona Park.) “/T_his huge open space 
was built for another time and purpose. /T_here are way too 
many roads for cars, and infrastructure that just doesn’t 
physically work anymore or serves no purpose for park 
users. You get rid of a lot of the asphalt, and all of those 
big unnecessary paths to nowhere would disappear and 
be replaced by expanded sports /f_ields.” 

13
20 IDEAS FOR HARNESSING THE FULL POTENTIAL OF FLUSH ING MEADOWS CORONA PARK
9. Establish a signature event that brings visitors and 
attention to the park
FLUSHING MEADOWS CORONA PARK (FMCP) ATTRACTS 
thousands of visitors when it hosts the hugely popular 
Hong Kong Dragon Boat Festival. But there are 
opportunities to create other annual events that would 
bring new visitors and attention to the park—and 
perhaps even generate a small amount of revenue for 
the park through ticket sales and temporary concessions. 
Like the Dragon Boat Festival, FMCP should aim 
for an event that is uniquely Queens and appeals to 
local communities that already make signi/f_icant use of 
the park. Park administrators should seek input from 
parks users, athletic and recreation organizations that 
regularly use the park, and community leaders. While 
it probably makes the most sense for the new annual 
event to take place in one of the park’s open areas , it 
may also be worth considering partnering with one or 
more of the park’s member institutions and making use 
of their auditoriums or other spaces. 
A few initial ideas include: 
• A “Best of the Boroughs” cricket tournament, featuring 
amateur cricket teams from each of the /f_ive boroughs 
(including those who regularly use FMCP). 
• A Best in the Park BBQ competition, in which amateur 
grillers would compete against one another for the 
title of best park barbeque, with the competition 
judged by local chefs and restaurateurs. 
• A weekend-long Volleyball or Ecua-volley tournament, 
capitalizing on the phenomenal popularity of this 
sport in FMCP . 
An event held in the summer of 2025 harkens to 
what’s possible. For the /f_irst time in years, “Queens 
Day,” as it’s called, revived a fair held at FMCP decades 
ago, where the park’s cultural institutions worked 
with NYC Parks to put on an entire day’s worth of free 
programming.

THE PARK QUEENS DESERVES
14
10. Cover one or more of the highways surrounding the park. 
What it needs is for the highways around it to be 
covered, and those highways then will connect 
neighborhoods. 
CLARE WEISZ 
Architect
FLUSHING ME ADOWS CORONA PARK ( FMCP) 
borders /f_ive neighborhoods that are home to hundreds 
of thousands of residents: Flushing, Corona, Rego 
Park, Forest Hills, and Kew Gardens Hills. But it 
can maddeningly be difficult for residents of these 
communities to access the park because of its challenging 
location, wedged between four highways. /T_his web of 
highways—the Grand Central Parkway, Van Wyck 
Expressway, Long Island Expressway, and Whitestone 
Expressway—essentially walls off the park from its 
surrounding communities and forces anyone on foot 
or bike to traverse a series of unpleasant and ofte n 
dangerous overpasses, underpasses, and bridges just 
to enter the park. Indeed, several of the people we 
interviewed for this report pointed out that the pa rk 
feels disconnected from its closest neighbors. 
/T_he highways also cut off different parts of the park 
from one another. /T_he Long Island Expressway essentially 
divides the park in two, albeit with a (steep) pedestrian 
bridge connecting them. /T_he Grand Central Parkway bisects 
the main portions of the park from the Queens Zoo, New 
York Hall of Science, and the World’s Fair Marina. 
One way to bridge this divide is by covering one or 
more of these highways adjacent to the park, creating green 
space—and potentially even some new affordable housing—
that seamlessly connects the park to adjacent communities. 
“It is a great park, but it has a sewer of cars going 
around it,” says Claire Weisz, a founding partner of WXY, 
a leading design /f_irm. “What it needs is for the highways 
around it to be covered, and those highways then will 
connect neighborhoods. /T_here’s absolutely no reason we 
can’t do what Houston and Dallas did. In some cases, 
that will add more parkland, and in others, that will add 
more affordable housing.”
As Weisz mentions, capping highways is nothing new. 
Cities like Boston and Dallas have undertaken similar 
projects. /T_here has also been a growing movement within 
New York City to rethink this age-old infrastructur e: 
the city is now studying the feasibility of capping the 
Cross-Bronx Expressway and considering new projects 
underneath the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway.
But at its core, capping the Long Island Expressway 
or other highways adjacent to the park presents a 
generational chance to rethink how the park works for 
all users. Since the LIE thoroughfare is below-grade—
park users cross a bridge over it to access the southern 
half of the park—the road could be decked over rather 
than buried, to be consistent with the altitude of the 
rest of the park, providing green space and a seamless 
landscape. With housing, the city could deploy valu e-
capture mechanisms, where windfalls from developments 
could become a recurring source of revenue.
Van Capelle pointed to Brooklyn Bridge Park 
as inspiration. “/T_hey built mixed-use housing and 
commercial buildings that now support the full 
operations of that park,” says Van Capelle. “Flushi ng 
Meadows Corona Park has an enormous footprint. If 
you had dedicated housing, it could kick off money to 
maintain the rest of the park, which is a smart ide a. 
We are in the middle of a housing crisis, and there’s an 
opportunity there, which deserves to be explored.”

15
20 IDEAS FOR HARNESSING THE FULL POTENTIAL OF FLUSH ING MEADOWS CORONA PARK
11. Daylight Flushing Creek to connect the park to Willets 
Point and the waterfront. 
IN F. SCOTT FITZGERALD’S NOVEL, “THE GREAT GATSBY,” 
the characters drive through what’s known as the “Valley 
of the Ashes,” a site where Flushing Creek was dredged 
and then converted into a dumping ground for ash and 
waste. /T_he next decade, the ash dump was cleared out by 
Robert Moses for the 1939-40 World’s Fair, creating what 
we know today as the boat basin, lakes, and parkland in the 
eastern end of Flushing Meadows Corona Park (FMCP).
But that recon/f_iguration, while providing signature 
sites, has proved problematic. Converting what was once 
natural marshland to lawns and asphalt—or ‘green’ 
surfaces to impermeable surfaces—ampli/f_ied /f_looding. It 
also severed the park from the waterfront along Willets 
Point and further north, at Flushing Bay. Furthermore, 
the Fountain of the Planets, a World’s Fair structure that 
sits in the body of water where the Creek once /f_lowed 
but has suffered from years of disinvestment, adds little 
to the park experience today.
/T_he time is now to change that. City leaders and 
park administrators should work to ‘daylight’ Flushing 
Creek, restoring the waterway that once traversed the 
area to its original form. 
Bringing Flushing Creek back online would come 
with a multitude of bene/f_its. First, it would help alleviate 
/f_looding issues, allowing water to take a natural course 
through the park instead of bursting through its seams. 
It would also help link the park to the coming waterfront 
development at Willets Point, creating a brand-new 
pedestrian and cyclist path from north to south. 
Restoring the Creek would also dramatically improve the 
park experience with a new natural amenity accessible 
to all park visitors, creating immense new opportunities 
for recreation and leisure.
It’s a bold proposal that demands vision, says Nans 
Voron, a senior director at SCAPE Studio, a landscape 
architecture and urban design /f_irm specializing in ‘nature-
based solutions.’ Because it would alter a signi/f_icant part 
of the park into something else entirely. “Maybe we 
shouldn’t actually manage the water the way it’s been 
historically managed and instead of combating it, w e 
should start embracing and welcome stormwater into 
the site,” explains Voron. “A series of wetlands co uld 
restore native species habitats that once thrived there, 
provide new recreational opportunities, and support 
educational programming.”
/T_he transformation of the eastern portion of the 
park would ensure that Flushing Meadows Corona Park 
could remain sustainable for years to come and reduce 
/f_looding in other parts of the park to the bene/f_it of 
parkgoers. Daylighting the creek would require either 
relocation of the Fountain of the Planets or an effo rt 
to redirect the creek around the Fountain—perhaps 
coupled with a plan to convert the Fountain into usable 
open space. 
/T_here is growing precedent for this kind of work. 
In the Bronx, work is underway to ‘daylight’ Tibbetts 
Brook, a body of water, which /f_lows from Yonkers, that 
was submerged in the 1800s, transporting wastewater 
through underground pipes.6 However, on particularly 
rainy days, sewage tips over into municipal waterways, 
in what’s known as a Combined Sewage Over/f_low (CSO). 
/T_he $133 million restoration will bring Tibbetts Brook 
back above ground and remove it from the sewer system, 
adding ‘green infrastructure’ and park space to Van 
Cortlandt Park.

THE PARK QUEENS DESERVES
16
12. Reduce the amount of asphalt in Flushing Meadows 
Corona Park (FMCP). 13. Create dynamic new food options in park by establishing 
a new vendor market filled with local food entrepreneurs.
FOR A PARK OF ITS SIZE, FLUSHING MEADOWS 
Corona Park (FMCP) has surprisingly few places to eat. 
/T_he park boasts two banquet halls on its periphery—
Terrace on the Park and the World’s Fair Marina 
Restaurant & Banquet—but neither are designed for 
casual parkgoers. /T_here is also a small snack bar on the 
edge of Meadow Lake and a handful of hot dog vendors 
with NYC Parks permits. Additionally, the Queens Night 
Market brings its popular rotation of food and beverage 
options to the lot behind New York Hall of Science on 
select weekends during warmer months. But food and 
drink options are strikingly limited, a problem sin ce 
concessions can greatly enhance the parks experience, 
especially in a park like FMCP where so many of those 
using it stay for a large chunk of the day and would enjoy 
opportunities for refreshments. 
Fortunately for these parkgoers, vendors from 
Corona, Flushing, and beyond are helping to /f_ill the void. 
Every day, they set up shop and sell regional delicacies, 
like pupusas from El Salvador and Honduras or tortas 
and cemitas from Mexico. By all indications, those using 
the park have embraced these informal food options. 
But while the vendors have been a huge plus for a 
park otherwise lacking food and beverage options, there 
have been some challenges. Park officials say the vendors 
often leave behind piles of trash and patches of oil and 
gas when they pack up at the end of the day. Without 
places to connect to electric outlets, some vendors 
PARKGOERS, OPEN SPACE EXPERTS AND OTHER SOURCES 
interviewed for this report agree: there is far too much 
asphalt in FMCP . Large stretches of wide roadway, 
especially in the area just north of the Long Islan d 
Expressway, see little use from parkgoers today. Many 
of these avenues are in poor condition and lack visual 
appeal, contributing little to the overall park experience.
/T_his is clearly a remnant of the World’s Fair, which 
created streets with names like “Avenue of the States,” 
“Avenue of Asia,” “Avenue of Africa,” and “Avenue of 
Peace.” But in a park where people regularly make use of 
tiny stretches of grass and dirt for picnics or volleyball, 
all this asphalt takes up space that could otherwise be 
/f_illed with grass and recreational uses.
At the same time, there are too many parts of the 
park that are used for parking. It’s important to n ote 
that many Queens residents who come to the park do so 
by car; there should be places where these New Yorkers 
can park to access FMCP . As such, it makes sense to 
have parking lots on either side of Queens Museum and 
by the Queens Zoo and New York Hall of Science. But 
park administrators should rethink parking around the 
Queens /T_heatre and New York State Pavilion, both of 
which are in the heart of park—places where it seems 
counterproductive to use limited space for parking. 
Park leaders should also explore opportunities to 
reduce some of the many parking spaces underneath the 
Van Wyck Expressway (east of the Fountain of the Planets). 
/T_his is a golden opportunity to create more of a green 
pathway from FMCP to the Queens Botanical Garden.
As one parks expert we interviewed told us: “Parking 
lots should not be part of the park.”
Part of developing a strategic plan for FMCP should 
include park leaders actively exploring ways to convert 
some of its asphalt into green spaces. 

17
20 IDEAS FOR HARNESSING THE FULL POTENTIAL OF FLUSH ING MEADOWS CORONA PARK
struggle to refrigerate meats or require generators, which 
can be loud and polluting. And because many vendors 
are unpermitted, their food operations go uninspected 
by the Health Department. 
/T_here is an opportunity to build on and formalize 
the park’s community of informal food vendors—and 
address challenges—in ways that bene/f_it park users 
and entrepreneurs alike. /T_he city should designate a 
’market zone’ in the park where vendors would be legally 
permitted to sell their wares, obtain access to physical 
infrastructure, like electricity, waste and recycling bins, 
and restrooms, and connect to municipal resources, like 
ID NYC, legal assistance, and food stamps.
Creating a more formalized vendor market in the 
park would not only /f_ill a need; it could also become a 
major attraction for the park, bringing in foodies and 
other visitors not dissimilar to how Shake Shack ha s 
brought people to Madison Square Park—and how the 
Queens Night Market has attracted thousands of people 
who wouldn’t otherwise visit the park. All the while, it 
would expand opportunities for entrepreneurs from the 
communities where most park users live. 
Quilian Riano, the dean of Pratt’s School of 
Architecture, says that the city can take inspirati on 
from cities like Medellín, Colombia. “/T_he city [Medellín] 
didn’t try to get rid of it; instead, it actually just provided 
places where vendors could be a part of something more.” 
Similarly, in Portland, Oregon, vacant parking lots were 
converted into ‘pods’ for food trucks, with public seating 
and cooking facilities.
Vending in city parks is illegal without a permit 
granted from NYC Parks. But the permits cost money 
and time to obtain, and without English pro/f_iciency or 
documentation, many street vendors are afraid of asking 
for institutional support out of fear of retribution from 
authorities. (/T_here have been several crackdowns of 
vendors in parks in recent years.7) But this wave of new 
vendors should be seen as an opportunity, not a threat. 
Just up the block, Corona Plaza serves as this 
dynamic model of formalizing a shared space while 
providing representation and amenities. When he was 
executive director of Queens Museum, Tom Finkelpearl 
watched /f_irsthand as the community organized to make 
it work for everyone. “It was a very well-used, beloved 
community resource for folks in that neighborhood,” he 
says. “/T_hese are the people that use Flushing Meadows 
Corona Park. /T_his is their park. And they developed this 
thing they had a big say in.”
But it’s evident, Finkelpearl added, that there needs 
to be more spaces like it. New ‘market zones’ in Flushing 
Meadows Corona Park offer the city a chance to expand 
the park’s concessions with diverse new options re/f_lective 
of who lives there. It could also provide an opportunity 
to test out ongoing pilots around vendor electri/f_ication 
and battery swapping. /T_his would not only enhance the 
park experience but also offer a safe space to the newest 
New Yorkers eager to make a living.
Creating a more formalized vendor market in the park 
would not only fill a need; it could also become a 
major attraction for the park, bringing in foodies and 
other visitors not dissimilar to how Shake Shack has 
brought people to Madison Square Park—and how 
the Queens Night Market has attracted thousands of 
people who wouldn’t otherwise visit the park.

THE PARK QUEENS DESERVES
18
14. Open a new full-service café or restaurant outside the 
Queens Museum. 
WHILE THE STARTING POINT FOR EXPANDING FOOD 
concessions in Flushing Meadows Corona Park (FMCP) 
should be with the mostly immigrant vendors who are 
already a hit with parkgoers, park administrators should 
not stop there. /T_hey should actively explore opportunities 
to create a new full-service café or restaurant out side 
of Queens Museum, in the shadow of the park’s most 
important icon: the Unisphere.
Most of New York City’s major parks have a hallmark 
concession to draw visitors and provide options for 
people who like the idea of a sit-down eating or drinking 
experience as part of their day in the park—and, 
importantly, offer public amenities, like restrooms, Wi-
Fi, and seating. Central Park has several, including Le Pain 
Quotidien, the Loeb Boathouse, the café at the Central 
Park Zoo, and the famous Tavern on the Green. Brooklyn 
Bridge Park has Fornino and Oddfellows Ice Cream Co. 
/T_he Rockaways has its boardwalk eateries, like Caracas 
and Rippers. Brooklyn’s McCarren Park has Parkhouse, 
and Staten Island’s Clove Lake has Stone House. 
It’s time that Flushing Meadows Corona Park joins 
their ranks. A notable eatery would attract a steady stream 
of foot traffic and attention to Queens’ signature park. It 
would also help close the de/f_icit in bathroom access and 
provide park goers a free place to sit indoors, which can be 
difficult to /f_ind outside of the major cultural institutions. 
(Most require a ticket.) It helps, too, that park goers could 
easily grab a bite or drink, enhancing the experience for 
regular or special event visitors alike.
Creating a restaurant or café abutting the Queens 
Museum would make a lot of sense, since it could both 
serve and attract museumgoers and appeal to some of the 
many visitors to the Unisphere. It would also be a welcome 
addition to the families expected at the coming Sun a 
Children’s Museum, which is set to be completed in 2027.
For years, the Queens Museum has explored the 
possibility of hosting a café outside their premise s. 
But museum staff say they’ve been hampered by the 
paperwork and upfront cost required by the city—a 
constant criticism8 of business opportunities within parks. 
Park administrators need not exclusively focus on 
that site. /T_hey should partner with NYC Parks and the 
city’s Economic Development Corporation (NYCEDC) to 
put out an RFEI (Request for Expressions of Interest) 
that would seek ideas from restaurateurs, café operators, 
and other food entrepreneurs—and then work with 
member institutions (like the Queens Museum) and 
community leaders to sort through the ideas for sit-down 
restaurants and cafes that come in. 
The city should actively explore opportunities to 
create a new full-service café or restaurant outside 
of Queens Museum, in the shadow of the park’s most 
important icon: the Unisphere.

19
20 IDEAS FOR HARNESSING THE FULL POTENTIAL OF FLUSH ING MEADOWS CORONA PARK
15. Explore opportunities to more fully harness Queens 
Theatre and its prized position in the park—perhaps 
by launching free outdoor performances during 
summer evenings. 
THE QUEENS THEATRE IS IN THE GEOGRAPHIC CENTER 
of the park. But it is open just a fraction of the time the 
park itself is open. As of July 1, 2025, for example, the 
/T_heatre listed a total of two performances for July and 
August, one of which is in daytime hours. 
Given its prized position in the park, park 
administrators and borough leaders should partner 
with architects, public space experts, theatre lead ers, 
and community members to brainstorm ways to more 
fully harness this asset. 
One idea is to bring the works of the Queens /T_heatre—
and potentially other cultural institutions that are in the 
park—out into the public commons, with free accessible 
programming that introduces creative works to a wider 
swath of New Yorkers, with the park as its stage.
Queens is long overdue for its own version of 
‘Shakespeare in the Park.’ A /f_lagship summer series of 
free, world-class performing arts events at Flushin g 
Meadows Corona Park (FMCP) would bring the kind of 
cultural programming often concentrated in Manhattan 
to the heart of the outer boroughs—elevating Queens as 
a destination for arts excellence while expanding access 
for the borough’s diverse, largely immigrant communities.
With Queens /T_heatre as a core partner, the series 
could showcase the institution in an entirely new light—
highlighting its diverse talent and broadening its appeal 
to funders and audiences alike. It would also help cement 
Queens /T_heatre as a major player in New York City’s 
performing arts landscape. /T_he /T_heatre, which has long 
pushed for outdoor programming, cannot do it alone. Its 
staff struggles to maintain decades-old infrastructure, let 
alone expand beyond its borders. 
In recent years, NYC Parks has partnered with other 
organizations to bring more cultural programming to 
parks. In Queens, the agency is working with Queens 
College to hire CUNY students to put on arts and dance 
performances. /T_he Jazz Trail concert series, which began 
in 2023, is also introducing free jazz performances to 
outdoor public spaces, in the home borough of greats like 
Louis Armstrong and Ella Fitzgerald. 
With sustained support, the city could leverage a 
storied arts center to create a major new cultural event 
series that Queens residents want and deserve.
Similarly, Sally Tallant, president and executive 
director of the Queens Museum, has long envisioned 
a larger free outdoor arts event, with all the cult ural 
institutions involved. Like ‘/T_he Gates’ in Central Park, 
or Celebrate Brooklyn in Prospect Park, a major arts and 
cultural exhibit could heighten the visibility of the park 
and offer residents something entirely new. 
“It’s not just what happens within the physical 
barriers of our institutions,” says Tallant. “It’s how do 
you incorporate community and cultural organizations 
into the park and reconnect communities. What can be 
done to do that socially, culturally, emotionally as much 
as just sort of physically.”
/T_here may be other ways to activate the Queens 
/T_heatre—and other cultural facilities in the park—during 
times when they are closed to the public. One possibility 
is to follow the lead of Central Park, which has converted 
the Harlem Meer Center, formerly known as the Lasker 
Rink, into multi-purpose usage. /T_he old pool, located at 
the park’s northern edge, was open for four months, the 
skating rink for two months. 
“/T_hese single-use facilities were empty for much of 
the year. We’re trying to /f_ind ways of having multi-use 
facilities,” says Smith of the Central Park Conservancy. 
“With its new con/f_iguration, we’re putting a platform 
with a turf /f_ield on top, so it can be open all summer 
long. We want to make it a destination year-round, like 
Sheep’s Meadow.”
/T_hough it may be more difficult to activate a small-
box theater when it isn’t being used than it was convert a 
skating rink, park leaders and borough officials would be 
wise to consider ways to more fully harness the /T_heatre 
and the prime space it takes up in the park. 

THE PARK QUEENS DESERVES
20
16. Create an ‘Emerald Necklace’ of seamless park 
connections in central and eastern Queens, with 
Flushing Meadows Corona Park at the core. 
WHILE THIS REPORT IS FOCUSED ON FLUSHING 
Meadows Corona Park (FMCP), Queens’ signature green 
space doesn’t exist in a vacuum. It’s the start of a network 
of parks through the eastern end of the borough that 
stretch all the way to the edges of Nassau County. 
But while there are seamless and appealing 
connections between many of these green spaces—
from the Queens Botanical Garden to Kissena Corridor 
Park, Kissena Park, Cunningham Park, and /f_inally Alley 
Pond Park—Flushing Meadows Corona Park breaks the 
chain. Although FMCP is in throwing distance from the 
Botanical Garden, it feels anything but connected. /T_he 
Van Wyck Express Overpass and the highly trafficked 
College Point Boulevard divide Flushing Meadows from 
the garden, not only making it difficult for pedestrians 
to get there but almost totally obscuring that the garden 
is literally across the street. 
Although there are overpasses and underpasses 
that connect Flushing Meadows Corona Park to 
nearby destinations like the Queens Botanical Garden 
and Kissena Corridor Park, many are dreary, poorly 
maintained, or built at steep inclines that make walking or 
biking difficult—and render them completely inaccessible 
for New Yorkers with disabilities. /T_hat’s assuming they’re 
even open or can be found at all. Way/f_inding within the 
park is minimal, and signage for the Brooklyn–Queens 
Greenway—a bike and pedestrian route that enters 
the park from Brooklyn—is barely legible or navigable. 
Meanwhile, the pedestrian bridge linking the park t o 
the Queens Botanical Garden has been closed for years 
due to disrepair. Park users attempting to reach nearby 
green spaces must also navigate high-traffic corridors 
like College Point Boulevard and the service roads of 
the Grand Central Parkway.
Research has long shown that better connected parks 
and open spaces boost usage, promote healthier lives, 
and reduce crime.9 With that in mind, city leaders should 
launch a new effort to upgrade the physical structures 
linking Flushing Meadows Corona Park to surrounding 
parks for a continuous stream of green space, takin g 
inspiration from Boston’s “Emerald Necklace”, a 1,100 
acre series of connected green spaces, including Boston 
Common, the Public Garden, and several other parks 
and an arboretum. 
“At present, the overpasses from the surrounding 
residential neighborhoods are merely utilitarian an d 
plainly unfriendly. /T_here is an opportunity to bette r 
connect these communities to the park by designing 
these overpasses as green spaces themselves,” said 
Arthi Krishnamoorthy of TenBerke Architects. “If we 
could improve the connections into the park, we could 
shorten that feeling of distance, so you feel like the park 
is reaching out into the neighborhoods.” 
Individuals we interviewed for this report suggested 
directly connecting the western side of Flushing 
Meadows Corona Park, near the Al Oerter Recreation 
Center and Lawrence Playground, to the pedestrian and 
cycling corridors due east, in Kissena Corridor Park and 
beyond. In addition, ‘green streets’ between parks and 
playgrounds in Corona to Flushing Meadows Corona 
Park would weave together a more coherent network of 
open spaces for residents to traverse and enjoy.
Quilian Riano, dean of Pratt’s School of Architecture, 
has brought classes to the area to study how to improve 
access. “/T_he number one thing we heard from people 
over the years is the lack of connection of Flushin g 
Meadows Corona Park to the communities it serves,” 
he said. “Especially in North Corona, one of the areas of 
the city with the least amount of public space. We were 
always thinking about how the park could have larger 
connections into the neighborhoods, so the park can be 
thought of as more than just being the physical park, 
but this expanded connector that brings more attention 
to the park itself.”

21
20 IDEAS FOR HARNESSING THE FULL POTENTIAL OF FLUSH ING MEADOWS CORONA PARK
17. Reimagine the entrances to the park, including a bridge 
over Flushing Creek. 
FLUSHING ME ADOWS CORONA PARK ( FMCP) 
has surprisingly few formal entrances for a nearly 900-
acre parcel of land. One familiar entry point is via the 
Passerelle Pedestrian Bridge from the Mets-Willets 
Point subway station. /T_here are also sparse entrances 
in Corona, Forest Hills, and Kew Gardens Hills. It’s also 
possible to navigate from College Point Boulevard, in 
Flushing, which involves walking underneath the Van 
Wyck overpass. It’s not uncommon to /f_ind DIY entrances 
where a fence was torn or a ‘desire path’ was created, by 
park goers fed up with /f_iguring it out.
/T_his is partially by design: access was limited to 
control crowds for the New York World’s Fair. But times 
have changed. If the park is going to be truly accessible 
to all, it’ll need more points to connect communiti es 
who are shut out from this valued green space in their 
own backyard. /T_he city should get to work implementing 
new entrances that help to extend the park’s borders, 
rather than make it feel caged in.
/T_here are a few places it could start. /T_he navigation 
from Flushing is difficult; there is only one way for the 
nearly 200,000 residents of Flushing to enter the park 
by foot, and it entails crossing the busy College Point 
Boulevard, sidling past the Al Oerter Recreation Center, 
and then traversing a parking lot underneath the Van 
Wyck Expressway, which lacks formal walkways. /T_hese 
obstacles make a difference: notably, there are fewe r 
residents from Flushing enjoying the park.
“It’s really hard to get to,” says Tom Grech, the 
president of the Queens Chamber of Commerce and a 
regular user of the park. “You could go further up Main 
Street, near Queens Botanical Garden, but that’s far from 
downtown Flushing. It’s the largest, most condensed 
Chinatown in America; it needs some space to breathe.”
/T_he city should consider building a footbridge over 
Flushing Creek, at the end of Roosevelt Avenue, to 
directly connect Flushing to the park. /T_his would make 
for a seamless entryway to one of the city’s busies t 
commercial corridors. It could also be paired with the 
proposed daylighting of Flushing Creek earlier in this 
report, and link to the coming waterfront development 
at Willets Point.
Another location to consider is the area near 
Terrace on the Park, a wedding venue within the park 
that originally doubled as a heliport for the 1964 New 
York World’s Fair. /T_he current parking lot spans about 
four avenues in Corona, forcing residents there to walk 
north or south to enter the park. Decking or buryin g 
the parking lot, which is sparsely populated, could offer 
the space needed to build an entirely new entrance for 
Corona residents.
If the park is going to be truly accessible to all, 
it’ll need more points to connect communities 
who are shut out from this valued green space 
in their own backyard. 

THE PARK QUEENS DESERVES
22
18. Expand the NYC Ferry system to Willets Point, in 
exchange for pier upgrades. 
FLUSHING MEADOWS CORONA PARK (FMCP) ATTRACTS 
large numbers of residents from across Queens. But 
there are untapped opportunities to welcome more New 
Yorkers from other parts of the city—and visitors staying 
at hotels in Manhattan, Long Island City, and Brooklyn. 
City leaders can do this by extending NYC Ferry’s Astoria 
line to Flushing Bay and Willets Point. Such an expansion 
would not only create an interesting new way to get to 
the park; it would also provide important new transit 
options for eastern Queens residents.
“We need greater connectivity to the park,” said Tina 
Lee, the co-chair of the Flushing Business Improvement 
District. “With all these projects going on— the Wi llets 
Point development, the potential Metropolitan Park—
connecting the park to the waterfront is more important 
than ever. We focus on getting Flushing Bay cleaned up 
and bringing the ferry to the waterfront.”
Elected officials and business leaders in Eastern 
Queens have long called for better transit access t o 
the growing neighborhoods they represent. A new 
soccer stadium and housing development in Willets 
Point a newly renovated LaGuardia Airport, and the 
coming Queens Waterfront Greenway will only heighten 
demand for access. And new greenways along Flushing 
Creek, which could carry visitors deeper into the park 
if daylighting moves forward, could provide seamles s 
access from a new ferry terminal.
A new ferry terminal could also help complement 
and enhance a signi/f_icant new capital project underway 
now to reconstruct the pavilion structures at the World’s 
Fair Marina. Expanding ferry service could further 
bene/f_it the marina through the renovation of existing 
piers, which have outlived their natural lifespans. In 
2024, Pier 1 was closed by NYC Parks due to deteriorating 
conditions, and boats have since been moved to Pier 3.10 
(Pier 2 refers to a historic pier that no longer exists.) An 
overhaul could allow the piers to better accommodate 
ferry boats, future commercial activity, and regular users, 
like the growing community of ‘dragon boaters’ who use 
Flushing Bay for practice.
“Pier 1 is really dilapidated,” said Rebecca Pryor, 
the executive director of Guardians of Flushing Bay , 
who advocates for active recreational use in the Ba y. 
“In November 2024, the pier failed its safety inspection 
and is now condemned. Dragon boaters—who serve as 
the eyes and ears of Flushing Bay—are launching their 
boats from temporary shipping containers near the 
public boat launch. /T_here are a lot of constraints with 
the set up; it’s not at all ideal.”
Expanding ferry service could further benefit the 
marina through the renovation of existing piers, 
which have outlived their natural lifespans.

23
20 IDEAS FOR HARNESSING THE FULL POTENTIAL OF FLUSH ING MEADOWS CORONA PARK
19. Redesign the Playground for All Children. 
FLUSHING ME ADOWS CORONA PARK ( FMCP) 
has had its share of notable /f_irsts. With the New York 
World’s Fair in both 1939 and 1964, it was arguably 
the /f_irst major urban park designed speci/f_ically around 
a major exposition, converting swaths of marshland 
into fairground and lawn. Its structures also becam e 
a temporary home for the United Nations before the 
organization’s home was complete, on Manhattan’s 
East Side. And, in 1984, it opened America’s /f_irst-ever 
playground designed with both disabled and non-
disabled kids in mind: the Playground for All Children.
/T_he Playground for All Children was a monumental 
achievement that demonstrated how design that is 
inclusive of people with disabilities can bene/f_it all users. 
Its opening set a national standard for all-play equipment 
and playgrounds, which became mainstream over time, 
both in New York City and around the world. It has 
amenities for children using crutches and walkers, who 
are deaf and blind, and who seek both active and passive 
play. Today, it hosts an array of programming catering 
to children of all ages and abilities.
But the Playground hasn’t been renovated since 
a $3.9 million makeover in 2002. In the meantime, 
society’s knowledge and awareness of children’s needs 
have only grown. /T_he city should fund a long overdue 
modernization and re-imagining of this pioneering 
infrastructure, so that Flushing Meadows Corona Park 
once again /f_inds itself at the forefront of park design.
Today, the Playground for All Children is well-used 
but showing its age. Like other playgrounds, NYC Parks 
offers maintenance to ensure that the equipment is 
still functional, yet materials are worn, the color s on 
the mats and metal bars faded. /T_he playground itself 
operates from April to November; it remains closed 
during winter months. 
“The Playground for All Children was a very 
wonderful idea,” said Krishnamoorthy of TenBerke 
Architects. “It had broad vision and broad ambition . 
What a welcome project it would be to redesign it today 
with all that we know about designing inclusive spaces 
for all children. It would be so meaningful for peo ple 
from all /f_ive boroughs to come to the park to enjoy a 
working model that inspires curiosity and joy amongst 
our youngest.”
A full-scale renovation would allow NYC Parks to 
update this historic play area to accommodate new 
trends in research around neurodiversity and inclusive 
design, as well as meet the department’s heightened 
modern standards for playgrounds, with stormwater 
infrastructure, low-maintenance /f_ixes, and open and 
accessible design elements. It would give a fresh n ew 
look to a playground that set an example decades ago 
and offer the children of Queens and beyond an inspiring 
and digni/f_ied place to play.
The Playground for All Children was a very wonderful 
idea...What a welcome project it would be to redesign 
it today with all that we know about designing 
inclusive spaces.
ARTHI KRISHNAMOORTHY 
Senior Principal, TenBerke Architects

THE PARK QUEENS DESERVES
24
20. Make better use of the area surrounding the New York 
State Pavilion. 
THE NEW YORKERS WHO FLOCK TO FLUSHING 
Meadows Corona Park (FMCP) seemingly use every 
square inch of the park, whether for picnics and grilling or 
sports like Ecua-volley, soccer, and cricket. But there are 
a handful of spaces in the park that are underused, often 
because they are poorly designed or just not inviti ng. 
One area of opportunity is the space surrounding the 
New York State Pavilion. 
Although it is a short walk away from the Unisphere, 
and not far from several well-used soccer /f_ields, the area 
surrounding the Pavilion is one of the sleepiest and least 
interesting parts of the park. Much of it is asphalt and 
is sometimes used for parking for visitors to Queen s 
/T_heatre. Yet it does not appear to be officially designated 
for parking, nor should it be. 
By working with a landscape architect, FMCP staff 
should strive to re-activate this quadrant of the park. 
It need not be a costly renovation or capital proje ct. 
Instead, park leaders should take a page from how former 
NYCDOT Commissioner Janette Sadik-Khan created 
dozens of new plazas at low cost by using ‘tactical ’ 
materials like paint, planters, and lawn chairs. 

THE PARK QUEENS DESERVES
25
Endnotes
1. NYC Parks. Flushing Meadows Corona Park Strategic Framework Plan. 2008.
2. Surico, John. “Expanding Micromobility across All Five Boroughs | Center for an Urban Future (CUF).” Center 
for an Urban Future (CUF), 2023, nycfuture.org/research/expanding-micromobility-across-all-/f_ive-boroughs. 
Accessed 7 Jan. 2025.
3. Office of the Mayor. “Mayor Adams Announces Major Expansion of Citi Bike Service in Outer Boroughs.” /T_he 
Official Website of the City of New York , Dec. 2024, www.nyc.gov/office-of-the-mayor/news/920-24/mayor-
adams-major-expansion-citi-bike-service-outer-boroughs-ridership-continues. Accesse d 7 Jan. 2025.
4. Gersh. “Scooter Use Is Soaring from Bronx to Queens: Report - Streetsblog New York City.” Streetsblog.org, 31 
Dec. 2024, nyc.streetsblog.org/2024/12/31/scooter-use-is-soaring-from-bronx-to-queens-report. Accessed 
7 Jan. 2025.
5. Waldstein, David, and Gabriela Bhaskar. “Ecuavoley, Anyone? Sport of Ecuador /T_hrives in Shadow of US 
Open.” Nytimes.com, /T_he New York Times, 6 Sept. 2023, www.nytimes.com/2023/09/06/sports/tennis/us-
open-ecuador-volleyball.html.
6. Van Cortlandt Park Alliance. “Daylighting Tibbetts Brook.” Van Cortlandt Park Alliance , vancortlandt.org/
programs-overview/daylighting-tibbetts-brook/.
7. Chu, Haidee, and Ashley Borja. “Vending Tickets in Parks Climb Steadily as New Arrivals Face Ramped up 
Enforcement.” THE CITY - NYC News, 17 June 2024, www.thecity.nyc/2024/06/17/vendors-ticket-enforcement-
increase-parks/. Accessed 7 Jan. 2025.
8. Surico, John. “Making It Easier for New Yorkers to Care for /T_heir Parks | Center for an Urban Future (CUF).” 
Center for an Urban Future (CUF) , 2024, nycfuture.org/research/making-it-easier-for-new-yorkers-to-care-
for-their-parks. Accessed 7 Jan. 2025.
9. Lansky, Amy, and Ken Rose. “Get Active! Park, Trail, and Greenway Infrastructure Interventions Increase 
Physical Activity - News & Events | Odphp.health.gov.” Health.gov, 2022, odphp.health.gov/news/202207/
get-active-park-trail-and-greenway-infrastructure-interventions-increase-physical-activity.
10. Chu, Haidee. “As Parks Shutters a Flushing Bay Pier, Hundreds of Dragon Boaters Scramble to Stay Together.” 
THE CITY - NYC News, 23 Dec. 2024, www.thecity.nyc/2024/12/23//f_lushing-bay-pier-dragon-boats/. Accessed 
7 Jan. 2025.

26
20 IDEAS FOR HARNESSING THE FULL POTENTIAL OF FLUSH ING MEADOWS CORONA PARK
Photo Credits
Cover, Photo by Paco Alonso: https://www.pexels.com/photo/globe-in-/f_lushing-meadows-corona-park-in-new-
york-13734215/ 
Page 2, Photo courtesy of Alliance for Flushing Meadows Corona Park.
Page 3, 
 Flushing Meadows Corona Park [map]. (2024). NYC Parks. Retrieved from https://www.nycgovparks.
org/parks//f_lushing-meadows-corona-park
Page 7, Photo courtesy of Alliance for Flushing Meadows Corona Park.
Page 12, Photo courtesy of Alliance for Flushing Meadows Corona Park.
Page 17, Photo courtesy of Alliance for Flushing Meadows Corona Park.
Page 24, 
 Photo of New York State Pavilion from: “New York State Pavilion.” Map, Google Maps. Accessed 11 
Aug. 2025. https://maps.app.goo.gl/T99vmCHEN7b4LryE6