TITLE: Paying for Parks
URL: https://cbcny.org/research/paying-parks
ISSUED: 2025-10-28
PDF: https://cbcny.org/sites/default/files/media/files/CBCREPORT_Paying-Parks_10282025_0.pdf

REPORT  CITY BUDGET
Paying for Parks
New York City Fiscal Year 2026 Budget and Historical Spending
Press Release
Download Report
Print
Share
EXPAND TABLE OF CONTENTS
October 28, 2025
Contents
Executive Summary
Introduction
NYC Budgeted 1.2 Percent for Parks in Fiscal Year 2026
Spending for Parks Rebounded Following a Decline in 1990s
Increased Capital Investment Has Driven Parks Spending Growth
NYC Parks Also Receive Hundreds of Millions of Private Dollars
Conclusion
Appendix A: Where to Find Centrally Funded Costs in the NYC Budget
Appendix B: New York City Spending for Parks
 
Executive Summary

New York City’s parks are critical to ensuring the city is a great place to live and visit. They offer millions of residents and visitors vital space for recreation, social activity, physical activity, and wellness. They are highly valued: New Yorkers consistently rated their neighborhood parks excellent or good on the Citizens Budget Commission’s (CBC) Straight From New Yorkers survey.

How much the City spends for parks is important to New Yorkers’ quality of life and the city’s competitiveness. With so many New Yorkers loving their parks, discussion about whether the City spends enough to maintain them is robust. To ground this discussion, it is helpful to examine how much the City spends for parks now, and how much it spent historically.

The Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) agency operating budget includes funds spent on salaries, maintenance supplies, and energy costs. However, this does not represent the City’s full funding for parks.

The total commitment for parks includes the agency operating budget, plus fringe benefits, pension contributions, and debt service that the City budgets centrally and is not included in the agency operating budget. Fringe benefits and pension contributions for agency staff are an essential and substantial component of employee compensation; DPR would not have staff without them. Debt service reflects the annual cost of very important capital investments for park reconstruction and expansion.

Reviewing history reveals two important findings: First, the City’s allocation for parks has been consistent over time. Second, as its capital investments in parks increased, growing debt service costs consumed a greater share of resources, and the share going for the department’s operations shrank.

CBC’s review of the DPR and City budgets from fiscal years 1970 to 2026 found that:

New York City allocates $1.4 billion—1.2 percent of the total Fiscal Year 2026 Adopted Budget—for parks. The budget is comprised of $627 million for agency operations (the DPR operating budget) and $805 million in “centrally allocated” costs—$209 million for employee fringe benefits, $80 million for pension contributions, and $516 million for debt service. Fully 1.6 percent of the City-funded portion of the City’s budget is for parks.
The City allocates 0.6 percent of the total Fiscal Year 2026 Adopted Budget to the DPR agency budget. This does not include the costs of DPR employees’ fringe benefits and pension contribution and debt service, which are centrally budgeted by the City. The share of the City budget allocated to the DPR agency budget declined to 0.6 percent, from 0.8 percent in fiscal year 1974.
The share of the City budget spent for parks has been relatively steady for decades, with the fiscal year 2026 share nearly identical to that in fiscal year 1974.  This comparison consistently includes the cost of pensions, fringe benefits, and debt service, as was standard before fiscal year 1978.
Debt service has grown six-fold, driving much of parks’ spending growth. Dramatically higher parks’ capital investment drove parks’ debt service spending to increase more than six-fold, from $81 million in fiscal year 2004 to $516 million in fiscal year 2026, consuming a larger share of total spending for parks.
The share of spending supporting parks’ daily operations declined over time. Spending on daily operations increased three-fold, from $288 million to $916 million between fiscal years 2004 and 2024. Since debt service spending grew faster, the share of total parks spending dedicated to daily operations declined from 78 percent in fiscal year 2004 to 64 percent in fiscal year 2026.

Determining the right amount to spend on each public service or function should be grounded in a full understanding of current and past expenditures. These decisions require tradeoffs between many different services and should consider what services New Yorkers need and want, and whether those services enhance New York’s competitiveness and quality of life. That requires smart choices based on the facts on the ground.

Download Executive Summary
Executive Summary: Paying for Parks (385.63 KB)
Introduction

Public recreational spaces enhance New Yorkers’ quality of life and are a key component of the city’s value proposition. Each year, millions of residents and visitors enjoy the City’s parks, playgrounds, beaches, pools, and recreational centers. The Citizens Budget Commission’s (CBC) Straight from New Yorkers Resident Survey found that neighborhood parks are consistently among the City’s most highly rated services.1

There is considerable discussion about City spending for parks.2 Those supporting increased funding for parks often point out that the DPR agency operating budget is just 0.6 percent of the total City budget.3 They note that over time the share of City spending going to the agency’s operating budget has declined.

But a complete assessment of the City’s funding for a service should include all resources, including an agency’s operating budget, as well as fringe benefits, pension contributions, and debt service costs that the City budgets centrally. For capital intensive agencies, such as transportation, environmental protection, or parks, this is especially important since significant capital investment is critical to the service and debt service costs are a relatively substantial portion of the annual resources spent.

To be clear, while parks are critical to New York’s quality of life and competitiveness, this report does not make a recommendation about whether spending for parks should be increased or decreased. However, it is important to accurately account for spending, today and in prior years, in these discussions.

NYC Budgeted 1.2 Percent for Parks in Fiscal Year 2026

The Fiscal Year 2026 Adopted Budget for parks totaled $1.4 billion: $627 million for the agency budget plus $805 million for centrally allocated costs, including $209 million for employee fringe benefits, $80 million for pension contributions, and $516 million for debt service.4 (See Figure 1 and Appendix A for more detail.) These centrally allocated costs are critical to operate, maintain, and expand the City’s parks. DPR could not employ staff without providing fringe benefits and pensions.  Capital investment, paid for over years by debt service, is needed to improve and grow the park and recreation system.

The $1.4 billion allocated for parks was 1.2 percent of the $115.9 billion Fiscal Year 2026 Adopted Budget. This is just below the 1.3 percent that was spent in fiscal year 1974, prior to the fiscal crisis. DPR’s operating budget, omitting debt service, fringe benefits, and pensions, was 0.6 percent of the total City budget in fiscal year 2026 and 0.8 percent of the total City budget in fiscal year 1974.5

NYC dedicated an even larger share of City funds for parks—1.6 percent of the $87.5 billion in City-funded spending in fiscal year 2026.6 (See Figure 2.) City funds, which exclude State and federal funds that are generally restricted to specific programs, represent the portion of the total budget that the City has the most discretion in allocating to different services. (See Appendix B.)

Spending for Parks Rebounded Following a Decline in 1990s 

The parks share of the total budget today—1.2 percent—is nearly identical to the share just prior to the 1975 fiscal crisis and has only been higher in two of the past 50 fiscal years—fiscal years 1986 and 1987. (See Figure 3 and Appendix B.) Between fiscal years 1991 and 2001, the share of City spending for parks declined from 1.2 percent to a low of 0.7 percent. The share has increased steadily since then, except for a temporary dip during the pandemic era in fiscal years 2021 to 2023. 

Increased Capital Investment Has Driven Parks Spending Growth 

Total spending for parks more than tripled, increasing $1.1 billion between fiscal years 2004 and 2026. During that time, parks debt service increased $435 million (more than six-fold), from $81 million to $516 million, driving much of the growth in total spending for parks. (See Figure 4.) Debt service was 37 percent of the total spending for parks in fiscal year 2026, up from 22 percent in fiscal year 2004. In contrast, over those years, the DPR operating budget increased $427 million (214 percent) and fringe benefit and pension spending increased $213 million (283 percent).

Debt service increases reflect the dramatically higher capital spending between fiscal years 2005 and 2024. During these years, capital expenditures for parks averaged $460 million annually, totaling $9.2 billion. (See Figure 5.) In contrast, in the preceding 20 years, capital expenditures for parks amounted to just $2.7 billion, averaging $130 million annually. Elevated capital spending during the 2000s can in part be attributed to PlaNYC, which prioritized refurbishing green spaces and investing in new infrastructure at sites like Fresh Kills Park and Flushing Meadows Corona Park.7

NYC Parks Also Receive Hundreds of Millions of Private Dollars

City spending for parks is not the only investment in NYC’s public green space. City residents benefit from dozens of non-profit conservancies and “friends of” groups that fund and operate some of the City’s parks.8 In fiscal year 2024, the operating budgets of the three largest conservancies—Central Park Conservancy, Friends of the High Line, and the Prospect Park Alliance—totaled $183 million.9 The private funding raised by nonprofit groups supplements City spending for parks and brings a variety of volunteer and fiscal resources that complement DPR’s operations.

Conclusion

Given how much has changed in the past sixty years, the relative consistency of City spending for parks is notable. That City spending for parks generally has been more than 1 percent of the City budget does not necessarily mean that the City is spending the right amount. But the discussion should start with a basic budget fact—how much the City spends for parks.

That discussion should be grounded in the City’s current fiscal situation and where opportunities exist to improve the impact of the money already allocated. 

The City faces budget gaps of $6 billion to $8 billion already; looming federal cuts will strain the City’s fiscal health. While additional funding could improve City parks, it is not the only way to improve services.

A heightened focus on management should drive improved services and equitable access to parks and recreation. A system that uses relevant high-quality data, regular management review, and clear accountability can deliver better results without higher spending.

Jesus Martinez

Senior Research Associate

Chris Henrichson

Director of City Studies
Download Report
Paying for Parks: New York City Fiscal Year 2026 Budget and Historical Spending (2.26 MB)
Appendix A: Where to Find Centrally Funded Costs in the NYC Budget

The City budgets for certain costs centrally: annual employer payments for future pension benefits; fringe benefit expenses including health insurance, Social Security, unemployment insurance, and supplemental welfare benefits; and debt service for long-term borrowing. City budget documents report the amount of pension, fringe benefit, and debt service costs allocated to each agency. The City also budgets centrally for judgments and claims paid on behalf of agencies, but these are no longer allocated to each agency.10

Centrally allocated costs, while separate from agency budgets, are the direct result of agencies’ budgetary and policy decisions. Omitting these costs dramatically understates the actual cost of the service. In fiscal year 2024, centrally allocated fringe benefit, pension, and debt service expenses totaled $25 billion—or 22 percent of total City spending.11

Confusion about the total cost of agency operations persists because most City budget publications only report the agency’s operating budget; central costs are reported infrequently. The City also changed how it reported central costs in late 1970s, which complicates comparisons before and after this period.

Before fiscal year 1978, fringe benefits and debt service were included in the budget table for each agency in the annual Expense Budget. In fiscal year 1978, the Executive and Adopted Budgets began to report fringe benefits, pension, and debt service costs in a footnote below each agency budget table, rather than in the agency operating budget. The City continues to report on agency fringe benefit, pension, and debt service costs in a similar manner in a dense 800-plus page report called the Expense, Revenue, Contract Budget. It now also provides two new sources of agency-level central costs. Starting in fiscal year 2004, the Message of the Mayor, published with the Executive Budget, has included “Full Agency Costs (including Central Accounts)” for 21 departments. Since fiscal year 2021, the City has also annually released a dataset of central costs across all agencies.12

Appendix B: New York City Spending for Parks
Footnotes
In 2025, 56 percent of residents rate their neighborhood parks as good or excellent. Parks are also among the few City services that have been consistently rated positively since 2017. Residents reported similarly positive ratings in 2017 (57 percent) and 2023 (53 percent). See Ana Champeny, Straight from New Yorkers 2025 Resident Survey (Citizens Budget Commission, June 2025), cbcny.org/research/straight-new-yorkers-2025.
New Yorkers for Parks, 1% for Parks Impact Report (prepared with HR&A Advisors, March 2023), https://www.ny4p.org/client-uploads/pdf/NY4P-1-Percent-for-Parks-Impact-Report.pdf.
New York City Council, NYC Council Outlines the State of Support for City Parks (March 20, 2025), council.nyc.gov/press/2025/03/20/2820/; Tim Murphy, City & State, Fighting to restore NYC’s parks budget: An interview with New Yorkers for Parks Executive Director Adam Ganser (June 16, 2025) www.cityandstateny.com/nyn-media/2025/06/fighting-restore-nycs-parks-budget/406097/; and New Yorkers for Parks, 1% for Parks Impact Report (Prepared with HR&A Advisors, March 2023), www.ny4p.org/client-uploads/pdf/NY4P-1-Percent-for-Parks-Impact-Report.pdf.
Note that CBC excludes expenses funded by Inter-Fund Agreements (IFA) to avoid double counting capital projects financed with debt service, and expenses funded by Intra City revenues to avoid counting services DPR provides on behalf of other City agencies. IFA funding is transferred from the City’s Capital Fund to the General Fund to reimburse department costs related to projects funded though the capital budget.
CBC also confirmed that the historical funding level for DPR prior to the 1975 fiscal crisis included fringe benefits and debt service costs. The 0.6 percent cited by some sources as the present-day funding level does not include those costs, thereby creating a misleading “apples-to-oranges” comparison. Prior to fiscal year 1978, the amount of centrally funded fringe benefits and debt service were included in agency budget presentation; beginning in fiscal year 1978, when the City transitioned to the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS), the amounts of centrally-funded fringe and debt service were removed from the agency budget table and reported in a note beneath the table. 
In fiscal year 2026, 98 percent of the DPR budget, exclusive of IFA and intra city revenue, is supported by City funds.
City of New York, Office of the Mayor,. PlaNYC: A Greener, Greater New York. (2007), https://www.nyc.gov/html/planyc/downloads/pdf/publications/full_report_2007.pdf
These organizations include: Central Park Conservancy, Prospect Park Alliance, Riverside Park Conservancy, Carl Schurz Park Conservancy, Madison Square Park Conservancy, Fort Tryon Park Trust, Seward Park Conservancy, Sutton Place Parks Conservancy, Washington Square Park Conservancy, Battery Park City Conservancy, the High Line, and the Brooklyn Bridge Park Conservancy. New York Restoration Project, Parks and Open Space Partners – NYC: Report on COVID-19 Impact on Public Spaces (May 1, 2020), www.nyrp.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/NYRP-Parks-and-Open-Space-Partners-NYC-Report-2020.pdf.
Aggregate spending among Central Park Conservancy, Friends of the High Line and Prospect Park Alliance confirmed through FY 2024 financial audited statements for each respective organization. Reported spending totals as following: Central Park Conservancy - $142,417 (reported in thousands), Friends of the High Line – $23,616 (reported in thousands), Prospect Park Alliance - $17,545,206.
OMB has not reported each agency’s share of judgments and claims in the Mayor’s Message since fiscal year 2012. For information on expenses for judgments and claims, Office of the New York City Comptroller, Annual Claims Report, comptroller.nyc.gov/reports/annual-claims-report/.
Office of the New York City Comptroller, Annual Comprehensive Financial Report, Fiscal Year 2024, comptroller.nyc.gov/wp-content/uploads/documents/ACFR-2024.pdf.
City of New York, Mayor’s Office of Management and Budget, Additional Costs Allocation, data.cityofnewyork.us/City-Government/Additional-Costs-Allocation/u42g-qjaj/about_data.