Lauren Melodia 
Alex Madge Paredes
November 2025
Dignified Pay for Quality Care: 
What New York’s Family Child Care 
Providers Need to Thrive

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
Many experts offered insights and many organizations 
provided support to make this report possible. Special 
thanks to Center for New York City Affairs (CNYCA) at 
The New School research associates Alexandra Madge 
Paredes and Audrey Jenkins, both New School PhD 
students. Alex and Audrey brought curiosity, critical 
thinking, diligence, care, and compassion to their work. 
Data collection and focus group data analysis would not 
have been possible without Alex’s leadership, reliability, 
and willingness to work late nights and weekends to 
accommodate providers’ schedules. Analysis of the 
survey data would not have been possible without 
Audrey’s impressive organizational skills, attention to 
detail, and thoughtfulness. Former CNYCA staff member 
Lennox Dietz managed the surveying of providers and 
cooperation with partner organizations. Dr. Kirstin Munro, 
a New School assistant professor of economics, provided 
mentorship and guidance on the design of this mixed 
methods research project. The contributions of CNYCA 
colleagues James Parrott and Mohamed Obaidy were 
invaluable. 
 
Seven community-based organizations partnered with us 
on this initiative: All Our Kin, Chinese-American Planning 
Council, Child Development Support Corporation, the 
Committee for Hispanic Children and Families, Day Care 
Council of New York, ECE on the Move, and the Women’s 
Housing and Economic Development Corporation 
(WHEDco). Staff and leadership at these organizations 
worked with us to design research instruments, recruit 
and train providers to participate, administer surveys, host 
focus groups, and provide guidance and feedback on this 
report. This project would not have been possible without 
them. 
Over 450 family child care providers completed our survey 
and hundreds more expressed interest and made efforts 
to participate. Additionally, 59 providers joined us for 
follow-up focus groups, which were invaluable for drawing 
conclusions from the survey results. Providers work long 
hours and are under-resourced. They’ve also been the 
subject of numerous past policy research projects and 
may be hesitant to invest more time in projects that may 
or may not deliver benefits. Considering all of this, we 
AKNOWLEDGEMENTS
deeply appreciate their openness to this project. 
In an effort to get a diversity of participants, we relied 
heavily on translators at various stages. They include 
Alexandra Madge Paredes, Xiao Wu, Chaoqi Chen, and 
Chunli Zhu. Algarabía Language Co-op, Lennox Dietz, and 
Cale Layton also assisted in these efforts. 
The report benefited from the feedback of advocates, 
providers, and researchers. They include: Dona Anderson 
and Claudine Campanelli (the Professional Development 
Institute at the City University of New York); Marija 
Drobnjak (Citizens Committee for Children of New 
York); Teresa Ghilarducci (Irene and Bernard L. Schwartz 
Professor of Economics and Policy Analysis, New School 
for Social Research); Dede Hill (Schuyler Center for 
Analysis and Advocacy); Jaime-Jin Lewis (Wiggle Room); 
Pete Nabozny (Children’s Agenda); and Simon Workman 
(Prenatal to Five Fiscal Strategies).
 
CNYCA colleagues Bruce Cory and Isabella Wang 
provided editorial and graphic and layout design 
assistance. The guidance of CNYCA executive director 
Kristin Morse was essential to bringing this project to 
fruition. 
Special thanks to Toni Melodia, the author’s mother, who 
was able to fulfill her dream of taking care of her own 
children, despite being a single parent, because she 
became a family child care provider when the author was 
an infant. She also provided thought partnership in the 
design and implementation of this project. 
This research was made possible through the generous 
support of the Robin Hood Foundation and its steadfast 
commitment to the workers who make quality child care 
possible. 
The author accepts sole responsibility for the substance 
and views presented in this report.
Copyright © 2025
The New School Center for New York 
City Affairs
New York, NY 10011
centernyc@newschool.edu
www.centernyc.org

Table of Contents
Executive Summary
Introduction
1. What Is Family Child Care and 
Why Is It Important?
Family Child Care (FCC) and 
Group Family Child Care (GFCC) 
Providers and Their Business
2.
A. The FCC and GFCC Business Model
B. The Providers 
FCC and GFCC Business and 
Provider Income
3.
A. Revenue
B. Operating Costs
C. Take Home Pay 
What Drives Inadequate Revenue 
and Low Take Home Pay?
4.
A. Low and Unstable Enrollment 
B. Public Program Design and Promotion
C. Market Failure and the Government’s 
“Market Rate Methodology”
D. Costs
Additional Challenges Impacting 
Program Quality and Stability
5.
A. Recruiting and Retaining Experienced Staff 
B. Agency and Bureaucracy Engagement
C. Late and Non-payment
D. Parent Dynamics
E. Small Business or Independent Contractor 
Status
F. 
Inability to Take Time Off
G. Lack of Information about 
1
12
14
17
27
39
A Five-Part Policy Package for Stable, 
High-Quality Home-Based ECE
6.
A. True Cost of Care Method
B. Universal Child Care
C. A Sector-wide Career Ladder
D. Public Marketing Campaign for All ECE 
Programs
E. A Wage Subsidy Fund
Recommendations
7.
A. Values
B. Policy Recommendations
Conclusion
References
70
71
Appendix
72
A. Glossary
B. Data and Methodology
C. A Pension Program for FCC and 
GFCC Providers
46
62
55

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
1
Child care, also called early care and education 
(ECE), is a hot topic. Despite increased 
investment in Pre-K and 3-K since 2014, the 
costs of private care outside these public 
programs have become burdensome for most 
families in New York City. It was, therefore, a 
central issue in the recent mayoral election. 
However, what has been missing from the call 
for universal child care during (and before) 
that campaign season is the experiences and 
perspectives of people who own, direct, or 
work in the over 10,000 licensed ECE programs 
in New York City, which collectively have the 
capacity to serve 468,000 children daily.
This report is designed to fill some of that void. 
In 2024, the Center for New York City Affairs 
(CNYCA) at The New School surveyed 465 
licensed Family Child Care (FCC) and Group 
Family Child Care (GFCC) providers – small 
business owners and independent contractors 
working from their own homes in all five 
boroughs.1 The surveys were conducted in three 
languages: English, Spanish, and Mandarin. The 
number of responses we received make this, 
to our knowledge, the second-largest survey of 
providers in the country.
FCC and GFCC providers are part of the city’s 
publicly subsidized ECE system, but they have 
struggled to stay afloat in recent years. Since the 
launch of Pre-K in 2014, the city has lost 1,400 
FCC and GFCC businesses. Of the providers 
we surveyed, 70 percent currently accept New 
York State Child Care Assistance Program 
(CCAP) vouchers. About 22 percent also provide 
1 
 CNYCA also surveyed legally exempt providers. A future 
CNYCA report will synthesize findings from the survey of this other home-
based ECE program type.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
contracted care for New York City Public Schools 
(NYCPS), typically the City’s 3-K program. 
We followed up that survey with focus groups 
including 59 of these providers to further 
understand their business practices and 
experiences working with existing government 
programs and policies. We were seeking insights 
about what policy and program changes are 
needed to sustain ECE businesses, including 
improving job quality in the sector as a way to 
recruit and retain ECE providers and workers.
We have incorporated some of what these 
providers told us in these sessions as the 
highlighted quotes you will find throughout this 
report. Providers participated in focus groups 
confidentially, so we have excluded providers’ 
full name from their quotes.
 
The surveys and focus groups revealed 
the following key findings and policy 
recommendations:
Key Findings
There are seven unique characteristics that 
distinguish home-based care from center-based 
care, which is why home-based ECE is so critical 
for child development, parents, communities, 
and the ECE sector. These special elements are 
particularly beneficial for children with special 
needs, single-child and immigrant families, and 
parents with non-traditional work hours.
FCC and GFCC programs provide:
• A home away from home; a bridge to the 
larger world for the children involved.
• Mixed-age learning, where children of all 
ages play and learn together.

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
2
• A long-term, family-style bond for children.
• A long-term relationship that supports 
parents too.
• Small programs with staffing ratios capable 
of delivering personalized care.
• Culturally and linguistically responsive care.
• Community-building among families and 
neighbors.
“When children first come to our family 
daycare, we're bilingual, so they feel safe and 
easily adapt. They're not afraid…When they 
were four, they could go home and teach their 
parents English.” – L., age 39, FCC provider in 
Bensonhurst, Brooklyn.
“The same kids I took care of when they were 
three and four are now 13 and 14, and they're 
hanging together still after all these years, 
creating a family outside of, you know, what 
we built in our daycare.” – K., age 49, FCC 
provider in Kingsbridge/Riverdale, the Bronx.
Providers are seasoned professionals, proud of 
the businesses they’ve established and their role 
as leaders in their communities.
• The average provider has been in business 
for 10 years.
• Providers work hard. In addition to being 
open 10 hours per day, the median provider 
works an additional 21 hours per week 
cooking, cleaning, shopping, and doing 
lesson planning and paperwork. Half of 
providers also offer early drop-off and/or late 
pick-up to accommodate parents. 
• Despite long hours and low take home 
pay, providers aspire to work in ECE. The 
majority (64 percent) want to continue to do 
so as small business owners in their homes. 
Others are interested in transitioning to other 
program types or occupations due to the 
ongoing systemic hardships their programs 
face.
• While there are no education requirements 
to own and operate a licensed home-based 
program in New York City, 40 percent of 
providers have an associate’s degree or more 
and 26 percent have a child development 
associate (CDA) certificate. An additional 52 
percent are interested in obtaining a CDA.
Providers are almost exclusively immigrant 
women and women of color.
• 94 percent of providers identify as female, 
and 90 percent identify as Black, Hispanic, 
Asian, or “other” (non-white). Over half (62 
percent) identify as Hispanic.
• Three-quarters were born outside of the U.S. 
but have lived in the U.S. for a long time – on 
average, for 23 years.
“I’m 30, but I will be old one day. I hope I make 
it, and it would be sad if I had given my life 
working [in] this country–paying taxes, paying 
everything–and to not get a pension with the 
way we work…We work hard.” – L., age 31, 
GFCC provider in Brooklyn.
FCC and GFCC providers are economically 
precarious, earning less than the minimum 
wage.
• Almost half (48 percent) of FCC providers 
and one-quarter (26 percent) of GFCC 
providers do not pay themselves a set wage. 
Their personal income is what is left after all 
business expenses are paid.
• Even when accounting for open business 
hours only, the median provider in 2023 
earned far less than the minimum wage. As 
independent contractors or small business 
owners, providers do not have employment 
contracts that legally guarantee them at least 
the minimum wage.
• While the median FCC and GFCC 
provider earned $7.33 and $5.98 per hour, 
respectively, their hourly wage increases 
threefold if they have “good enrollment,” to 
$18.84 and $17.62, respectively.2 
2 
 "Good enrollment” is defined as an FCC program with six 
or more children enrolled or a GFCC program with 10 or more children 
enrolled. It is used throughout the report to compare to the assumptions 
included in “true cost of care” models by Simon Workman, co-founder 
and principal of Prenatal to Five Fiscal Strategies.

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
3
• The median FCC or GFCC provider earns 
less per hour than ECE assistant teachers 
(Figure 2). Even when controlling for good 
enrollment, FCC and GFCC providers earn 
significantly less than the professionals with 
the most similar work responsibilities: center 
directors.
• Not only are providers unable to pay 
themselves fairly; they struggle to bring in 
enough revenue to cover their operating 
costs, including offering competitive salaries 
to teachers and assistants. According to a 
baseline estimate of the true cost of care, in 
2023 an FCC or GFCC program would need 
annual revenue of $130,288 or $245,630, 
respectively, to break even.3 However, only 
12 percent of FCC providers have annual 
revenue above $100,000 and only 13 percent 
of GFCC providers have annual revenue 
above $200,000.
• In addition to low revenue, providers 
3 
 CNYCA analysis of Simon Workman and Steven Jessen-
Howard, “New York State Cost of Quality Child Care Study” (Center for 
American Progress, November 2019), adjusted for inflation.
Providers are earning less than the minimum wage
Median provider by license type and enrollment
All*
With 6 or
more
enrolled
All*
With 10
or more
enrolled
All*
With 6 or
more
enrolled
Annual Take-home 
Pay
$19,047
$58,666
$15,431
$47,942
$15,485
$29,942
Hourly Pay #1 
Open Hours Only
$7.33
$18.84
$5.98
$17.62
$6.01
$11.20
Hourly Pay #2 All 
Hours
$4.81
$15.52
$4.16
$11.07
$4.30
$7.58
FCC
GFCC
All
"Hourly pay #1" uses the provider’s open business hours only. "Hourly pay #2" includes both open business hours and additional
working hours each provider reported (see Section 2-A).
*Excluding providers who had zero children enrolled in 2023. Number of providers surveyed = 408
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
also experience significant hardship due 
to reimbursement payment policies by 
government agencies, as well as late and 
non-payment by parents, government 
agencies, and Family Child Care Networks 
(FCCNs).4 These include: extra costs due to 
late payment fees and interest on loans and 
credit card debt; late payment to staff and 
lower take-home pay; and disruptions in 
housing utility services.
“So, in the beginning, I undercut myself…You 
want to get people in and you'll start low, which 
I did, and yeah, it did get people in. But then I 
realized I was subsidizing the daycare out of my 
salary…I wasn't getting a salary.” – T., provider 
in Central Harlem.
 
“We make about $6 an hour, but we need to 
pay [staff] $16.50.” – Y., age 32, GFCC provider 
in the northeast Bronx.
4 
 An FCCN is a non-profit member organization. FCC providers 
are required to join an FCCB if they want to contract with the NYCPS to 
provide 3-K. See Appendix A: Glossary for more details.
Figure 1

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
4
As a result of low take home pay, many providers 
are extremely dependent on public assistance, 
which also helps to offset operating costs and 
increase the stability of their programs.
• While the average provider has lived in 
her current place of residence for 13 years, 
78 percent of providers are renters and, 
therefore, face some level of housing 
insecurity compared to homeowners. Of 
these renters, one-third (32 percent) of FCC 
providers and 14 percent of GFCC providers 
Median wage by ECE occupation and program
2023
$36.92
$48.08
$23.08
$31.25
$13.85$13.33
$7.33
$18.84
$5.98
$17.62
Director ------------
Pre-K teacher -----
ECE worker** -----
--------- FCC
---------- GFCC
Center (non-profit)
Public
All
With "good" enrollment*
minimum wage in 
2023 was $15
*With "good" enrollment is defined as an FCC with 6 or more children enrolled or a GFCC with 10 or more
children enrolled.
**ECE worker includes lead and assistant educators.
Excluding providers who had zero children enrolled in 2023. Number of providers surveyed = 408
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024; CNYCA analysis of American Community
Survey 2023 5-Year Data, U.S. Census Bureau
live in public housing or receive a housing 
subsidy voucher.
• Thirty percent of FCC providers and 20 
percent of GFCC providers are SNAP 
recipients.
• Over half are on a public health insurance 
plan, either because they qualify for 
Medicaid or, in some cases, receive Medicare 
or veterans’ benefits. Only 20 percent, 
largely GFCC providers, purchase health 
insurance on the market. Ten percent are 
Figure 2
Pre-K teacher 
ECE worker** 
FCC
GFCC

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
5
uninsured. Thirty percent, largely GFCC 
providers, reported that they have lost health 
insurance in the past because of fluctuation 
in take home pay.
There are five systemic causes of low 
take-home pay and business instability.
1. Low and Unstable Enrollment
Providers are severely under-enrolled. In 
2023, the average provider was operating 
at approximately half capacity. The average 
FCC provider had 4.1 children enrolled and 
the average GFCC provider had 8.8 children 
enrolled, regardless of whether or not they had 
a NYCPS contract. Enrollment has a significant 
impact on revenue and pay. The median hourly 
wage for FCC and GFCC providers increases 
threefold if they have “good enrollment.” (See 
Figure 1.) However, only 29 percent of FCC 
providers and 51 percent of GFCC providers 
surveyed had good enrollment in 2023.
 
Efforts to increase parent’s access to ECE 
programs since 2014 through the creation and 
expansion of Pre-K and then 3-K (which contract 
with center- and home-based programs) have 
had a negative impact on many FCC and GFCC 
providers. Providers are more likely to have 
experienced a decline in enrollment, rather 
than an increase in enrollment as one might 
expect from such substantial public investment. 
While CNYCA was unable to obtain sufficient 
data from the City to do a neighborhood-level 
analysis of supply and demand, low enrollment 
signifies that the challenge parents have 
accessing ECE is not lack of overall supply, but 
the inability to afford the price of care outside of 
subsidized options. 
“It's not an easy profession. And it does mean 
that, like, if you lose one student or lose a few 
students, you know, you might not be able to 
pay the rent that month ...because the profit 
margin is so small.” – A., age 36, GFCC provider 
in Bushwick, Brooklyn.
2. Public Program Design and 
Promotion
Prior to the launch of Pre-K and 3-K, providers, 
who offer mixed-age child care were able to 
recruit a family when a child was an infant or 
toddler and retain that family as a client for 
years. Now, given that many children leave 
at the age of three or four for 3-K or Pre-K, 
providers have much more enrollment turnover. 
Moreover, they must focus their enrollment on 
children of younger ages that require additional 
staff. 
 
There is a significant disparity between the 
contract rates for center-based programs and 
the FCCN-affiliated FCC and GFCC programs. 
The current FCCN extended-day contract pays 
$16,900 per child per year, which is $10,573 
less than the $27,473 the City paid the average 
center-based program for offering the same 
service in City Fiscal Year 2025 (New York City 
Mayor’s Office of Operations 2025). For the 
school-day contract, FCCN-affiliated providers 
earn $9,900 per child per year in revenue 
– nearly half the $19,314 the average center-
based program received for offering the same 
service in FY 2025. This creates significant 
disparities between what home- and center-
based programs are able to offer. It poses a 
challenge in a 3-K enrollment process that is 
centered around parent choice.
 
“The pay is different. If 
we were provided with 
the same amount of 
money as the center, 
we could hire better 
teachers.” – Y., age 
50, GFCC provider 
in Sheepshead Bay, 
Brooklyn.
“It's not an easy profession. And it does mean that, like, if 
you lose one student or lose a few students, you know, you 
might not be able to pay the rent that month ...because the 
profit margin is so small.” 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
6
Furthermore, NYCPS’s centralized enrollment 
process and the requirement that most FCC 
and GFCC providers be affiliated with an 
FCCN in order to contract with NYCPS creates 
extra barriers between providers and parents. 
Numerous providers report that they are unable 
to help parents navigate the enrollment process 
to actually secure a seat at their program.
 
“It's hard to fill your programs now because you 
can have these children come at infancy. And 
then by the time they're three, the parents are 
taking them out. Whereas before Pre-K-For-
All, before Covid, if you had a child that was in 
your program, the likelihood is that…they was 
there 0 to 10 years old, 0 to eight. Now they're 
leaving you at three years old.” – S., age 46, 
GFCC provider in East New York, Brooklyn.
 
“There were so many requests for children 
under two. Because I had so many children 
in September, I hired an extra teacher. I hired 
six people with three teachers. With six staff, I 
could only fill 10 slots. We had to fill 10 slots. I 
have 10 students, three teachers, and rent, and 
it's less than even working part-time, right?... 
the large 3K program has the ratio of one 
teacher to four children, while we can only have 
one teacher care for two children under two 
years old. If we have the ratio of one teacher to 
three children, our life might be a little easier.” – 
H., GFCC provider in Flushing, Queens.
3. Market Failure and the 
Government’s “Market Rate 
Methodology”
“You're dealing with younger parents. A lot of 
times because they've just had these children, 
so they usually have less cash saved.” – A., age 
36, GFCC provider in Bushwick, Brooklyn.
The problem of inadequate tuition rates is 
rooted in the dynamic between private pay 
clients and providers. Based on extensive 
experience, providers know that most parents 
cannot afford the true cost of care or even the 
CCAP voucher rate. Therefore, FCC and GFCC 
providers’ average private pay rates are 30 
percent and 38 percent lower, respectively, than 
a baseline estimate of the true cost of care.
Because New York currently uses a “market 
rate methodology” to determine CCAP 
voucher rates, the market failure that results 
in inadequate private pay rates is embedded 
in public rates. The CCAP voucher rate, 
determined by the State Office of Child and 
Family Services (OCFS) through a survey it 
conducts with providers every two years about 
their private rates, is not surprisingly also 
inadequate to cover the true cost of care. In 
2023, the maximum CCAP voucher rate was, on 
average, 28 percent and 36 percent lower than 
a baseline estimate of the true cost of care for 
FCC and GFCC providers, respectively.
In addition, New York State law prohibits 
providers from accessing the maximum CCAP 
rate unless they already charge their private 
pay clients the same or more. Thirty percent 
of providers surveyed by CNYCA reported not 
receiving the maximum rate. Efforts to make the 
application process easier with an “attestation 
form” in recent years have not eliminated this 
problem. Instead, this attestation form has 
complicated private rate setting in general, 
leading to further problems with the market rate 
methodology.
 
CCAP voucher rates are also the rates NYCPS 
pays FCCN-affiliated providers who contract 
to provide 3-K programming to the public. 
Approximately 20 percent of providers in the 
“You’re dealing with younger parents. A lot of times because they’ve just had these 
children, so they usually have less cash saved.”

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
7
city are impacted by this contract. Currently, 
providers receive the maximum 2024 CCAP 
voucher rate ($325) if they have an extended-
day contract (10 hours of care per day) and 
a reduced rate ($275) if they have a school-
day contract (six hours and 20 minutes of 
care per day). This contract rate is woefully 
inadequate given that the CCAP voucher rate 
does not cover the baseline cost of care in an 
ECE program, much less one with the higher 
credential and program requirements needed to 
meet NYCPS standards. 
4. The Impossible Challenge of Staffing 
a High-quality Home-based Program
ECE is labor intensive, and ECE quality is directly 
linked to children developing a long-term bond 
with experienced, trusted ECE staff.
 
The most immediate impact of inadequate 
private pay and public rates is on staffing. 
Providers have to compete with other ECE 
programs to recruit and retain staff. Because of 
lower public rates and higher required staff-to-
children ratios than center-based and public ECE 
programs, providers are severely constrained 
in their ability to offer competitive wages and 
benefits.
 
Providers also compete with other industries 
offering minimum wage jobs that have fewer 
training requirements and shorter onboarding 
periods. The ECE background check process is 
incredibly long (it can take months or sometimes 
a year to complete) and the lack of agency 
transparency about the processing time is 
extremely stressful for providers and new staff.
 
Current public program design, which funnels 
three- and four-year-olds towards NYCPS-
contracted care, puts providers in an impossible 
position to adequately staff programs for the 
infants and toddlers that require higher staffing 
ratios. Furthermore, given fluctuations in 
enrollment, providers have to choose between 
asking staff to accommodate variation in weekly 
hours worked or paying for staff even when 
their enrollment doesn’t justify it.
 
“I wish I could pay them more, much more, 
because they do their CDA, their credentials, 
everything. Then there are home attendant jobs 
that pay $20, $22 an hour. What are people 
going to do if they have papers, work permits? 
They would rather leave.” – T., age 43, GFCC 
provider in Bushwick, Brooklyn.
 
“I want to bring another staff member. I want 
to be able to take a break…But money is the 
problem. Because just when I thought I was 
able to afford to bring in a new staff member, I 
lost four kids off my roster. So, it's just hard, like 
getting the staff and when things is sometimes 
not consistent.” – T., age 37, GFCC provider in 
Hunts Point, the Bronx.
 
5. Providers Are Lost in a Sea of 
Agencies and Organizations
Providers engage directly with one State agency 
– OCFS – and as many as four separate City 
agencies (the Department of Health, Human 
Resources Administration, Administration for 
Children’s Services, and NYCPS) as well as 
the Mayor’s Office of Child Care and Early 
Childhood Education. Twenty percent of 
providers are affiliated with an FCCN, which also 
engages with NYCPS (and the State Education 
Department) on their behalf. Also, 44 percent 
are union members of the United Federation of 
Teachers (UFT). Providers also receive support 
from many community-based organizations, 
some of which are funded by OCFS, such 
as those that make up the NYC Child Care 
Resource & Referral Consortium (NYC CCR&R).
 
Despite, or perhaps because of, this plethora 
of ‘supporters,” providers often are unable to 
find assistance when problems arise and are 
also burdened by the paperwork required by 
“I wish I could pay them [my staff] more, 
much more, because they do their CDA, 
their credentials, everything.” 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
8
so many agencies. Many providers describe a 
lack of coordination across agencies resulting 
in slower processes and redundancies. These 
create extra work for providers, who often have 
to submit the same paperwork to multiple 
agencies or spend countless hours following up 
with agencies to check on the status of issues 
that disrupt their daily operations.
 
Providers’ major challenges with City and State 
agency engagement include:
• Inadequate orientation regarding OCFS 
regulations, the role of City agencies, and 
small business law.
• Unclear timelines, poor communication, 
and the inability to receive human technical 
assistance regarding licenses, background 
checks, CCAP voucher and 3-K applications, 
and inaccurate or late payments.
• Inconsistencies with the inspection process.
• Lack of knowledge of existing efforts to 
support them, such as scholarships for 
training and CDA certificates and free dental 
and vision benefits from UFT.
 
“They´re always asking me for the same 
document, the same. I go back and I send it, 
send it to the supervisor, upload it to FAM, 
bring it in personally, and like they said, you get 
your receipt and two days later they´re asking 
for it again. I have one [assistant] for eight 
months and the other for a year and a half and 
they´re not fully approved yet.” – L., age 52, 
GFCC provider in Bushwick, Brooklyn.
 
“If you have something wrong somewhere, 
you'll have a six-year violation! Parents these 
days will check online to see if your center is 
good...One time I had a violation. Do you know 
why? The doctor forgot [to] write down a dose 
he administered.” – W., age 49, GFCC provider 
in Flushing, Queens.
 
Policy Recommendations
Based on our research with providers, this report 
recommends policy actions that will immediately 
and in the long-term align ECE supply and 
demand, decrease the cost burden on families, 
improve quality, and fairly compensate hard-
working providers, who are currently living at or 
near poverty. 
All such actions must:
• Involve meaningful FCC and GFCC provider 
input.
• Prioritize language justice for a widely multi-
lingual provider universe.
• Provide adequate agency staff for human 
technical assistance and support to 
providers.
• Involve inter-agency cooperation and 
collaboration with the NYC CCR&R.
Business instability and low take home pay 
are the result of structural and systemic 
challenges that demand policy reform and 
public investment. There is not simply one policy 
solution. Our research demonstrates that a five-
part policy package can resolve the challenges 
presented here and result in a high-quality, 
stable, home-based child care sector. As our 
research demonstrates, home-based child care is 
a critical component of early care and education 
and will continue to be for any plans to expand 
access to more parents through subsidized or 
universal care. 
“If you have something wrong 
somewhere, you’ll have a six-year 
violation!”

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
9
1. A true cost of care methodology for all 
public vouchers and contracts would tie 
public rates to the actual costs of running 
an ECE program, including adequately 
compensating staff and providers. If 
adopted, this would immediately increase 
provider take home pay, staff wages and 
benefits, and ECE business stability for the 
70 percent of providers that accept CCAP 
vouchers, and the 22 percent that provide 
contracted care for NYCPS. 
2. Universal child care in New York, meaning 
that all families, regardless of income level 
or immigration status, can access ECE 
subsidized by the government (with no or 
low-cost co-pays for families). All seats in 
a universal system would be paid through 
public vouchers or contracts. Therefore, low 
private pay rates would be eliminated and 
would no longer put downward pressure on 
business stability, provider take home pay, 
and staff wages. 
3. A sector-wide career ladder that 
guarantees compensation for similar 
work across all program modalities will 
have numerous benefits. Not only will it 
fairly compensate people that have been 
historically undervalued (based on working 
hours, experience, and credentials), it can 
bring new people into the ECE workforce, 
reduce the loss of existing ECE staff and 
providers, and remove pay disparities that 
cause turnover and quality difference across 
modalities. 
4. A public marketing campaign for all 
ECE programs should describe all such 
programs and clarify that 3-K and Pre-K are 
part of a broader sector. It should educate 
parents about the unique characteristics 
of FCC and GFCC programs, such as a 
mixed-age learning, that was overshadowed 
by the launch of universal Pre-K and 3-K. 
Such a campaign will immediately improve 
enrollment at FCC and GFCC programs. 
If all FCC and GFCC programs had good 
enrollment, provider take home pay would 
increase threefold. 
5. A wage subsidy fund at the State or City-
level would be used to fill the gap between 
current salaries and a minimum wage 
standard for each ECE occupation. This 
gap may exist because of low or unstable 
Figure 3

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
10
enrollment, low private 
pay rates, or vouchers or 
contracts using a market 
rate methodology. As 
independent contractors 
or small business owners, 
providers do not have 
the protections of an 
employment contract, so a 
wage subsidy fund is a necessary protection 
for them. If the City had a wage subsidy 
fund for ECE workers today, 6,500 FCC or 
GFCC providers and their staff would have 
immediate improvement to take home pay 
and wages. 
“The only time we hear about anybody is when 
they want their name on a ballot...They send 
a thousand of the same fliers during the week. 
I don't know you. I've never seen you in my 
community before. But you say, ‘Oh, we're 
going to do this for child care workers.’ Then 
you get into office…and now that I helped 
vote you in? I'm just mud.” – K., age 45, FCC 
provider in Mott Haven, Bronx.
In addition to these systemic changes, our 
report includes 33 specific policy actions that 
range from short- to long-term and no-cost to 
requiring significant public investment. Fifteen 
of them, listed here, are actions the City can 
take today. 
The Mayor’s Office should:
1. Replace or improve current City websites, 
like MyCity.nyc.gov, with one that houses 
all information about childcare supply 
and options for families. An improved 
marketplace will increase public awareness 
about current ECE options and help the 
City and advocates understand where (by 
neighborhood or program modality) there 
is a supply and demand mismatch. It should 
educate the public about modalities (home-
based, center-based) and program types 
(full-day care, Pre-K programming) and 
their unique values. Users should be able to 
search by key criteria and locate programs 
on a map. It should easily connect families 
to application processes for subsidized ECE 
(CCAP vouchers and NYCPS programs). 
2. Develop a new marketing campaign to 
educate the public about all ECE programs 
simultaneously and about options for 
families to affordably access these programs. 
Integrating a quality rating and improvement 
system into this marketing (and the 
related website above) can also improve 
matchmaking between parents and ECE 
programs.
3. Commit to using City revenue to guarantee 
that existing subsidized ECE options are 
accessible to all eligible families regardless 
of whether or not Child Care and Block Grant 
(CCBG) funds adequately cover costs. 
4. Submit an annual report to the City Council 
that evaluates capacity and utilization across 
private and public ECE programs. Without 
this knowledge, public programs cannot be 
expanded in ways that prioritize vulnerable 
families and established ECE programs. 
5. Work with the Fund for the City of New York 
to amend the rules governing its Returnable 
Grant Fund (RGF) program so that FCC and 
GFCC providers can access interest-free 
loans in the event of late payments from City 
agencies. 
The City Council should:
6. Hold an annual public hearing with all 
agencies involved in the ECE system as well 
as relevant community-based organizations 
(such as the NYC CCR&R), FCCNs, ECE 
program staff and providers, and parents 
to respond to the mayor’s annual report 
“The only time we hear about anybody is when they 
want their name on a ballot...They send a thousand of 
the same fliers during the week. I don’t know you. I’ve 
never seen you in my community before.”

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
11
(see recommendation #4) and share their 
perspectives on the current ECE system. This 
hearing can break down silos between ECE 
businesses, parents, and agencies; improve 
understanding across these groups of what 
is currently working (and not); and facilitate 
democratic planning for the ECE system.
7. Amend its laws to include FCC and GFCC 
providers in the existing public pension 
programs (a process that would also include 
state legislation). 
The Administration for Children's 
Services (ACS) should:
8. Overhaul the Childcare Attendance & 
Payment System (CAPS) or replace it with 
a better one, so that providers can enter 
enrollment and attendance to be paid 
accurately and on time. 
9. Implement presumptive eligibility, as has 
been permitted by the governor, permitting 
the City to use CCBG funding to cover the 
cost of care while ACS determines family 
eligibility for a CCAP voucher. 
The Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene (DOHMH) should:
10. Communicate expected processing times for 
licenses and staff background checks, as well 
as contact information for appropriate staff 
for applications, inspections, and grievances 
to providers. Work with OCFS to identify 
strategies for improving license and staff 
background check processing times.
11. Work with OCFS to develop a written policy 
in layman's terms and in multiple languages 
for site visits, violations, and grievance 
processes that prioritizes education and 
safety. 
12. Facilitate an inspection process that strikes 
a balance between technical assistance and 
public safety, pairing providers with the same 
inspectors when appropriate.
The Human Resources Administration 
(HRA) should:
13. Partner with the NYC CCR&R and other 
community-based organizations to actively 
assist FCC and GFCC providers to maintain 
their Medicaid, SNAP, and other benefits in 
light of the 2025 One Big Beautiful Bill Act. 
New York City Public Schools (NYCPS) 
should:
14. Use a true cost of care methodology for its 
next five-year contract with FCCNs to deliver 
programs such as 3-K. 
15. Work with FCCNs and their affiliated 
providers to improve the ability of providers 
to engage with parents during the 3-K 
enrollment process. 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
12
INTRODUCTION
Child care, or early care and education (ECE), 
is a hot topic. Despite the City’s investment in 
Pre-K and 3-K since 2014, the costs of private 
care outside of these public programs has 
become increasingly burdensome for most 
families in New York City. It has, therefore, been 
a central issue in the recent mayoral election 
and will continue to be a priority for Governor 
Kathy Hochul as she heads into an election year 
in 2026. 
However, what has been missing from the call 
for universal child care is the experiences and 
perspectives of people who own, direct, or work 
in the over 10,000 licensed ECE programs in 
New York City that have the capacity to serve 
468,000 children daily. This report is designed to 
fill some of that void. 
In 2024, the Center for New York City Affairs 
at The New School surveyed 465 of the city’s 
approximately 6,500 licensed Family Child 
Care (FCC) and Group Family Child Care 
(GFCC) providers – small business owners and 
independent contractors working from their own 
homes in all five boroughs. Our in-depth survey, 
the first of its kind in the country, was conducted 
in three languages: English, Spanish, and 
Mandarin. The number of responses we received 
make this, to our knowledge, the second-largest 
survey of providers in the country. In 2025, we 
also invited providers to participate in focus 
groups to further understand their business 
practices and experiences.
We have incorporated some of what these 
providers told us in focus groups as the 
highlighted quotes you will find throughout this 
report. Providers participated in focus groups 
confidentially, so we have excluded providers’ 
full name from their quotes.
FCC and GFCC providers are part of the city’s 
publicly funded, subsidized ECE system, but 
they have struggled to stay afloat in recent 
years. Since the launch of Pre-K in 2014, the city 
has lost 1,400 FCC and GFCC businesses. Of 
the providers we surveyed, 70 percent currently 
accept State Child Care Assistance Program 
(CCAP) vouchers, and 44 percent provide 
contracted care for New York City Public Schools 
(NYCPS), typically the City’s 3-K program. 
In our survey, we sought insights about what 
policy and program changes are needed to 
sustain FCC and GFCC businesses, which are a 
critical component of the city’s ECE ecosystem. 
These programs are unique in offering: a 
mixed age, adaptable setting for all children, 
from infants to after-school care; culturally and 
linguistically responsive care; small programs 
that are well-suited for children with special 
needs; a willingness to serve low-income families 
receiving CCAP vouchers; and non-traditional 
hours care. 
Policy and program changes that can improve 
job quality for providers and workers in the 
sector are critical for maintaining capacity in this 
unique ECE sector. 
CNYCA’S work was motivated by the findings 
of our 2023 report, “High Calling, Low Wages: 
Home-Based Early Care and Education Providers 
in New York City,” which utilized American 
Community Survey data and found that home-
based providers (of which FCC and GFCC 
providers are just two types) are:
• The lowest-paid workers in the ECE 
industry, making less than the minimum 
hourly wage. In 2021, the median home-
based provider made an estimated $10.61 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
13
per hour in New York City–less than half (40 
percent) what the median center-based Pre-K 
teacher earned per hour.
• More likely to rely on public assistance 
than others in the city workforce. With half 
of home-based providers living at or below 
200 percent of the federal poverty level, they 
are twice as likely to receive food stamps 
than others in the city’s workforce. Forty-six 
percent of providers utilize Medicaid for their 
health insurance coverage.
• Severely housing insecure. Seventy-nine 
percent of the city’s home-based providers 
are renters. Their low take home pay makes 
them severely rent-burdened, meaning that 
they spend more than 50 percent of their 
income on housing, which threatens business 
stability. 
• Overwhelmingly immigrant women and 
women of color, even compared to other 
ECE occupations. 
These findings demonstrated the need for 
immediate action to redesign ECE programs and 
policies and how they compensate regulated 
home-based providers. They also illuminated 
the need for additional information about the 
business practices, revenue and expenses, and 
experiences of regulated home-based providers, 
so that policy reforms can better meet their 
unique needs. 
This report specifically synthesizes findings 
from our research on FCC and GFCC providers 
who engage most frequently with government 
policy and programs. The purpose of this report 
is to provide clearer insights about what policy 
and program changes are needed to sustain 
their businesses and improve their job quality. 
A future report will synthesize findings from 
our research on legally exempt providers. (See 
Appendix A: Glossary.)

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
14
New York City’s existing ECE system is complex. 
The provision of child care takes place largely 
in the private sector and is subsidized by public 
resources, and parents’ and providers’ unpaid 
work. For families that rely on care outside 
of their homes, regulated ECE is provided in 
a variety of program types. Each has its own 
unique set of State and City regulations, policy 
supports, and funding streams. (See Appendix 
A: Glossary.) 
According to State regulation, FCC and GFCC 
programs are small businesses owned and 
operated by providers in their own homes. FCCs 
may care for a maximum of eight children at a 
given time, while GFCCs may care for up to 16 
children, so long as the programs have sufficient 
staffing. (See Appendix A: Glossary.) The only 
technical difference between the two, then, 
is that GFCCs are expected to hire staff and, 
therefore, may have a more complex business 
structure. FCCs, on the other hand, can be run 
solely by the business owner herself, unless she 
chooses to hire staff in order to care for infants 
or for additional support. 
This regulatory definition doesn’t fully describe 
what is unique and special about FCC and 
GFCC programs, and why they are so critical 
for child development, parents, communities, 
and the ECE sector. In this section, we provide 
a description of FCC and GFCC programs 
developed by providers themselves during 
CNYCA’s focus groups. There are seven unique 
qualities of FCC and GFCC programs that 
distinguish these from other ECE program types 
and modalities.
 
1. A home away from home; a bridge to the 
larger world: FCCs and GFCCs operate out 
of residential spaces, bridging the familiarity 
of a child’s own home and the complex, 
social world. This is critical, given that ECE 
programs are the first learning environment 
many children experience outside their 
nuclear family. Providers describe their 
spaces as comfortable, loving, familiar, and 
intimate. 
“Because it's in a home, it's a nice bridge…
giv[ing] children these strong foundations 
before they're ready to move on to the next 
thing.” – A., 36-years-old, GFCC provider in 
Bushwick, Brooklyn.
What Is Family Child Care and Why Is It Important?
SECTION 1
Seven unique qualities of home-based child 
care.
FCC and GFCC programs provide: 
• A home away from home; a bridge to the 
larger world.
• Mixed-age learning, where children of all 
ages play and learn together.
• A long-term, family-style bond for children.
• A Long-term relationship that supports 
parents too.
• Small programs with staffing ratios capable 
of delivering personalized care.
• Culturally and linguistically-responsive care.
• Community-building among families and 
neighbors.

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
15
2. Mixed-age learning, where children of all 
ages play and learn together: Compared 
to center-based and Pre-K programs, 
which often separate children into different 
classrooms by age, providers offer a mixed-
age setting. Providers become experts in 
all child development stages, not just for 
a particular age. Providers describe how 
beneficial this is for all children: younger 
children observe and learn from older 
children; older children learn to care for 
younger ones and can consolidate their own 
knowledge as they do so. This interactive 
experience supports children who learn in 
different ways. For families with multiple 
children, all of them can be cared for in the 
same space, fostering bonds and making 
pick-up and drop-off more convenient for 
parents. For single children, a mixed-age 
environment allows them to obtain the social 
and emotional development benefits of 
bonding with children of different ages.
3. A long-term, family-style bond for 
children: FCCs and GFCCs serve all age 
groups, from infants to school-age children. 
The providers become a key relationship 
in a child’s life, not just for one year but 
throughout the critical stages of early child 
development. This is distinct from a center-
based or Pre-K program, where a child 
graduates from one classroom teacher to 
another. Decades of empirical research 
demonstrate that children under the age 
of five are best served by caregivers with 
whom they have a long-term relationship, 
which fosters a loving bond (Bromer et al. 
2021). Some providers mentioned that young 
children were able to confide in them about 
serious issues at home. Additionally, long-
term bonding provides insight into a child’s 
unique needs, interests, and challenges. 
This gives providers more 
information with which 
to adapt curriculum and 
programming to support 
the learning and growth of 
individual children.
“We start with babies. They have been with us 
from the time they're in diapers until they're 
ready to eat, talk, and develop their daily habits. 
We have the same environment, the same 
teachers, and that gives them a greater sense 
of security, which helps them develop very 
healthily both physically and mentally.” – L., 
56 years old, GFCC provider in Bensonhurst, 
Brooklyn.
4. A long-term relationship that supports 
parents too: When a child is enrolled in an 
FCC or GFCC program for multiple years, 
the long-term relationship with the provider 
benefits the parent as well. This is critical 
for young or first-time parents and single-
child households in particular. Providers, 
with their years of experience with children 
of all ages, can help parents make sense 
of what to expect at various stages of 
child development and when to seek out 
professional support for developmental 
challenges or special physical needs. This 
bond also allows providers to support 
parents in other ways, including navigating 
complex applications for CCAP vouchers, 
early intervention, public school, and social 
assistance. Providers often find themselves 
counseling parents regarding family 
dynamics and offering flexibility to parents 
with work schedules that require early drop-
off or late pick-up.
“A lot of the new parents…They don't really 
know a lot about parenting, honestly. So, they 
get worried, like one child might have eczema, 
and…they're panicking… And I have to say ‘no, 
she's okay. You know, it's eczema acting up.’” 
– H., GFCC provider in Flatbush/Midwood, 
Brooklyn.
“A lot of the new parents…They don’t really know a lot 
about parenting, honestly.”

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
16
5. Small programs with staffing ratios 
capable of delivering personalized care: 
FCCs and GFCCs have a smaller capacity 
and higher staffing ratios than centers, 
which facilitates more personalized care. 
For example, the ratio for infants in an FCC 
or GFCC program is one adult for every 
two children, whereas in a center the ratio 
is 1:4; the ratio for four-year-olds in an FCC 
or GFCC program is one adult for every 
six children, whereas in a center the ratio is 
1:12. A smaller program where one educator 
supports fewer children has many benefits. 
Providers can offer more of the one-on-one 
support critical for helping to identify special 
needs and disabilities, such as hearing or 
visual impairment. Many children find large 
classrooms overwhelming and do better in 
a smaller setting with more individualized 
support. Providers can be more flexible in 
curriculum and program design; a smaller 
cohort allows them to adapt programming to 
meet the needs and interests of each child. 
They also are better able to accommodate 
food sensitivities and cultural and religious 
preferences. 
6. Culturally and linguistically responsive 
care: As primarily immigrant women, 
English is not the first language for many 
providers, so they become a culturally and 
linguistically responsive option for families 
where English is a second language. This 
allows young children to more easily adapt to 
a new setting outside of their nuclear family, 
because they do not have language barriers. 
Additionally, in a residential setting it is 
easier for providers to represent their own 
cultures, giving children exposure to new 
cultures, customs, and languages. 
“When children first come to our family daycare, 
we're bilingual, so they feel safe and easily 
adapt. They're not afraid…When they were four, 
they could go home and teach their parents 
English.” – L., 39 years old, FCC provider in 
Bensonhurst, Brooklyn.
7. Community building among families 
and neighbors: FCCs and GFCCs are more 
grounded in community than center-based 
programs because the providers live in the 
communities where they work. This fosters 
new connections in the community, not only 
between the provider and the family, but 
also among all parents and children enrolled 
in the program. This is especially critical for 
families who have recently migrated to the 
city – from another state or another country.
“The same kids I took care of when they were 
three and four are now 13 and 14, and they're 
hanging together still after all these years, 
creating a family outside of, you know, what we 
built in our daycare.” – K., 49 years old, FCC 
provider in Kingsbridge/Riverdale, Bronx.

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
17
This section provides details about how FCC 
and GFCC programs operate and who the 
owners of these businesses are. All statistics 
about providers are generated from our 2024 
survey of 465 FCC and GFCC providers. (See 
Appendix B-1: Survey Data.)
While FCCs and GFCCs are similar in many 
ways, capacity and staffing requirements 
create distinctions. Throughout this report, we 
provide survey results on “all providers,” which 
is inclusive of FCC and GFCC providers, and 
we disaggregate results on FCC and GFCC 
providers when there are significant differences 
in results or as it relates to differences in their 
businesses. 
Family Child Care (FCC) and Group Family Child Care (GFCC) Providers and 
Their Businesses
SECTION 2
2-A. The FCC and GFCC Business 
Model
Each type of ECE program is managed 
differently. While center-based programs 
are often non-profit or for-profit businesses 
employing people in various occupations, 
FCC and GFCC programs are small businesses 
owned and operated by the provider out of her 
own home. 
FCC and GFCC programs have the same staffing 
ratios but different capacities. (See Appendix 
A: Glossary.) The only technical difference 
between the two, then, is that GFCC programs 
are expected to hire staff. That influences how 
providers set up and manage their businesses. 
Figure 1
Business legal entity type
Sole Proprietor
42%
70%
38%
Corporation
28%
6%
32%
LLC
28%
18%
28%
General or Limited 
Partnership
2%
6%
2%
Nonprofit
0%
2%
0%
Entity Type
All
FCC
GFCC
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
18
For example, GFCCs are more 
likely to be incorporated and hold 
insurance policies needed for staff. 
FCCs can be successfully managed 
with less business structure; 
incorporation and payroll services 
can be unnecessary added costs. For 
both FCCs and GFCCs, insurance 
policies like workers compensation 
insurance will only cover staff, not 
business owners. OCFS regulation, 
access to legal and tax advice, 
enrollment and related staffing 
levels, and revenue all influence how 
providers set up and manage their 
businesses and how they relate to 
overall ECE policy.
Legal Structure
The average provider has been in 
business for 10 years; 96 percent of 
them report their business income 
for tax purposes. Figure 1 illustrates 
the different business entity types 
providers use. FCCs are most likely 
to operate as unincorporated, 
self-employed sole proprietors, 
as are over one-third of GFCCs. 
A sole proprietor is similar to an 
independent contractor. They 
therefore pay taxes based on 
business income, not on wage 
earnings.
Staff and Payroll Processing
Providers are required to hire staff 
based on age-based enrollment 
levels. GFCCs overwhelmingly 
(93 percent) use a mix of full-time, 
part-time, and temporary staff; less 
than half of FCCs do, with only 17 
percent having full-time staff. (See 
Figure 2.) However, nearly half (46 
percent) of all providers who do not 
have staff are interested in hiring 
Figure 2
staff. As discussed in Section 5-A, providers have a hard time 
recruiting and retaining staff, so policy solutions that would 
improve their ability to do so would also increase their ability 
to care for more infants and improve their own job quality. 
One of the key motivations of this research is to more 
precisely estimate take home pay for providers. How 
providers pay their staff and themselves is important, not 
just for how we analyze the data we collected, but also what 
policy solutions can be used to improve ECE job quality. 
CNYCA’s survey found that about half of FCC providers and 
one-quarter of GFCC providers do not pay themselves a set 
wage; as independent contractors, their personal income is 
what is left after all business expenses are paid. (See Figure 
3.) Throughout the U.S. economy, many sole proprietors 
with no staff benefit from keeping their business accounting 
Program staffing by license type
Has any staff
46%
93%
Has any full-time (FT) staff
17%
66%
Has any part-time (PT) staff
32%
67%
Average number of FT staff
0.71
1.56
Average number of PT staff
0.39
1.61
Average number of 
temporary staff
0.23
0.95
Average number of family 
helpers
0.65
0.78
FCC
GFCC
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Figure 3
Payroll processing by license type
Staff
Self
Staff
Self
W-2 Payroll employee
18%
12%
48%
42%
1099 independent contractor
38%
28%
38%
24%
I don't pay myself a wage/salary
48%
26%
FCC
GFCC
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
19
As Figure 3 shows, over one-third of providers 
also pay staff as independent contractors, who, 
like their employers, are responsible for self-
employment taxes. This is often symptomatic of 
the enrollment and revenue instability that puts 
providers in the position of relying on temporary 
workers rather than permanent staff.
Non-traditional hour offerings
10
20
30
40
50%
54%
52%
54%
48%
50%
46%
6%
8%
6%
10%
10%
10%
Early drop-off
Late pick-up
Overnight care
Weekend hours
All
FCC
GFCC
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Working hours
Median Provider
Open business hours
51
Cooking, cleaning, shopping
10
Paperwork
4
Lesson Planning
4
Other
3
Total
72
Weekly hours
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Figure 5
Figure 4
simple and determining their income annually 
as they complete the tax filing process. For 
providers who have staff and benefit from having 
more structured business accounting, “I don’t 
pay myself a wage/salary” is a sign that business 
revenue is too low or too uncertain to plan for 
compensating themselves. 
Open Business Hours 
and Working Hours
The median provider is open 
for business 10 hours per day 
for five days per week and 
closes their business only 
about one week per year. 
Because they work from their 
homes, they are also often 
willing to provide extended 
pick-up and drop-off hours 
beyond the 10-hour day for 
parents who need them. (See 
Figure 4.)
Providers are on-site during 
all open business hours, or 
50 hours a week. They also 
report working additional 
hours to cook, clean, shop, 
and do paperwork and lesson 
planning. (See Figure 5.) There 
is little variation between FCC 
and GFCC providers on these 
results. Combining these 
and incorporating reported 
days off, the median provider 
usually works 72 hours per 
week.

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
20
Figure 6
Public ECE Program 
Participation 
While providers are small business 
owners, they also interact with many 
government programs and policies 
intended to make ECE accessible and 
affordable to parents. (See Figure 6.)
This means that policy decisions can 
directly impact them, their staff, and 
the families they serve.
For example, 80 percent of providers 
receive reimbursement for meals to 
children from the federal Child and 
Adult Care Food Program (CACFP). 
Additionally, 70 percent accept Child 
Care Assistance Program (CCAP) 
vouchers that income-eligible, 
working, or academically enrolled 
parents can use to cover the cost of 
ECE at a program of their choosing. 
Approximately 22 percent contract with 
New York City Public Schools (NYCPS), 
primarily to provide 3-K to the public.5 
See Appendix A: Glossary for more 
details about these programs.
2-B. The Providers
Gender
While 49 percent of employed New 
York City residents identify as female, 
94 percent of providers do (U.S. Bureau 
of Labor Statistics 2025).
Race, Ethnicity, and 
Immigration
While 63 percent of all employed 
people in New York City identify as 
Black, Hispanic, Asian, or “other” 
(non-white), 90 percent of FCC and 
GFCC providers do (U.S. Bureau of 
5 
 While 22 percent of providers contract with 
NYCPS, 44 percent of CNYCA survey participants do. 
Therefore, our survey over-sampled providers with this type 
of public program engagement.
Participation in government programs
20
40
60
80%
70%
62%
70%
44%
30%
48%
4%
0%
4%
80%
64%
84%
Received CCAP
voucher in 2023
NYCPS Contract
(through FCCN)
NYCPS contract
(direct)
Participates in CACFP
All
FCC
GFCC
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Race and ethnicity of FCC and GFCC providers
20
40
60%
Hispanic
Black
Asian
White
American
Indian
Native
Hawaiian
or Pacific
Islander
Other
Prefer not
to answer
All
FCC
GFCC
2%
2%
2%
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Figure 7
Labor Statistics 2025). Over half (62 percent) identify 
as Hispanic. Black participants to our survey were 
especially likely to identify as FCC providers, while Asian 
participants were more likely to be GFCC providers. 
(See Figure 7.)

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
21
Figure 8
While 43 percent of the city’s 
workforce was born outside of 
the U.S (U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 2025), that was true 
of three-quarters of FCC and 
GFCC providers. (See Figure 
8.) Although FCC providers 
are more likely to be native-
born than GFCC providers, 
they are still primarily 
immigrants. While CNYCA did 
not survey providers about 
citizenship status, we found 
that immigrant providers have 
lived in the U.S. for a long 
time – on average, for 23 
years.
Age
In New York City, 71 percent 
of all workers are 25-54 years 
old – in their prime working 
years (U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Immigration status of providers
20
40
60%
76%
64%
78%
24%
36%
22%
Not born in U.S.
Born in U.S.
All
FCC
GFCC
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Parental and other caretaking dynamics in
providers’ households
All
FCC
GFCC
All
FCC
GFCC
Providers with children under 18
69%
67%
69%
Providers with child ages 0-5
32%
19%
33%
Percent with children ages 6-12
46%
34%
48%
Percent with children ages 13-18
49%
51%
49%
Providers who rely on family members 
for help with business
56%
52%
57%
Providers who send remittances to 
family/friends abroad
66%
52%
68%
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Figure 9

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
22
Figure 10
Figure 11
Highest level of education
High school degree or equivalent
Did not answer
Bachelor's degree
Associate's
degree
Master's degree
40%
20%
18%
14%
8%
All
38%
14%
22%
20%
FCC
40%
18%
18%
14%
10%
GFCC
It is likely that many participants in the "Did not answer" category have less than a high school degree or
equivalent given license requirements. Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Housing type
Renter: Private
Renter: NYCHA
Renter: Voucher assistance
Homeowner: Mortgage
Homeowner: No mortgage
64%
8%
18%
All
50%
16%
16%
16%
FCC
66%
8%
18%
GFCC
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Statistics 2025). That was also 
true for 70 percent of CNYCA 
survey participants. They range 
in age from 21 to 81 years old. 
The average provider is 47; 
some 29 percent are 55 and 
older. 
Family Dynamics
By definition, providers use 
their own living space for 
their businesses. Therefore, 
it is important to understand 
how their businesses fit in the 
context of their families and 
households. 
Only one percent of providers 
lives alone; the average 
provider lives with 3.5 people, 
2.4 of which are directly 
dependent on the provider. 
State child care regulations 
require that all household 
members ages 18 and 
older must participate in a 
background check. 
Sixty-nine percent of providers 
are the parent or guardian 
of a child under the age of 
18, but only 32 percent are 
the parent or guardian of a 
child under the age of six. 
(See Figure 10.) One-third of 
providers, then, likely qualify 
for and should receive a CCAP 
voucher for their own child who 
is occupying a “seat.” OCFS 
regulation removes a seat 
from a provider’s total capacity 
for paying clients for each of 
the provider’s own children 
who are present. However, it 
is a misconception to assume 
that most providers are 
currently in business in order 
to simultaneously care for their own young children. Instead, 
providers are more likely to be seasoned parents with school-
age children. Lastly, over half of providers report that they rely 
on family members to help with their business operations. More 
insight about this choice and dynamic can be found in Section 
5-A. 
Housing
The average provider uses 40 percent of her home exclusively 
for business activities, and another 48 percent of her home for 
business activities during open business hours. The average 
provider has lived in her current place of residence for 13 years; 
78 percent are renters. Therefore, they face some level of 
housing insecurity compared to homeowners. (See Figure 11.) 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
23
Compared to GFCC providers, FCC providers 
are much more likely to live in NYCHA housing, 
where they have enhanced tenant protections 
and rent control.6 FCC providers are also more 
likely to receive housing vouchers to subsidize 
their rent of private housing, which provides 
relief on a main business operating cost.
Educational Attainment
In New York State, all ECE providers and staff are 
6 
 For households earning less than 120 percent Area Median 
Income (AMI), NYCHA residents pay 30 percent of their income as 
rent. There is no point at which a NYCHA resident loses their housing 
if their income exceeds this threshold. However, if a NYCHA resident’s 
household income exceeds 120 percent AMI for 24 consecutive months, 
NYCHA will readjust the resident’s rent to “fair market value.” 
required to complete industry-specific training—
some more than others. For example, everyone 
is required to complete pre-employment health 
and safety training. All center-based, FCC, and 
GFCC providers and staff are also required to 
complete 30 hours of training every two years. 
 
Center-based directors are required to have 
a bachelor’s degree or be in the process of 
obtaining one. Family providers have no 
formal education requirements, aside from 
CPR certification. Instead, they must be at 
least 18 years old with two years of ECE work 
experience. (Unpaid work for one’s own family 
counts.) Nevertheless, 26 percent of providers 
have a bachelor’s degree or more. (See Figure 
Figure 12
Career aspirations
20
40
60
64%
72%
62%
26%
18%
28%
12%
18%
12%
8% 8% 8%
6%
8%
6%
14%
16%
14%
Home-based
child care
provider
Continue to
work in ECE
but in a center
occupation
Work in K-12
education
Work in a
different
industry
Retire
Other
All
FCC
GFCC
Participants were able to select more than one option. Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
24
9.) Educational attainment is relatively similar for 
FCC and GFCC providers, with GFCC providers 
more likely to have advanced degrees.
Career Aspirations
Despite the long hours and precarity in this part 
of the ECE sector, providers aspire to work in 
ECE. The majority want to continue to do so 
as small business owners in their homes, but 
many are also interested in transitioning to other 
program types or occupations. (See Figure 12.)
Providers can access more opportunities 
for enrolling children by having a contract 
with NYCPS. They can also access different 
occupations in the ECE sector with more 
education, particularly the child development 
associate (CDA) certificate. However, the 
long hours providers work makes additional 
education challenging to pursue. Over half 
of providers who do not have the CDA are 
interested in obtaining it. (See Figure 13.) 
Providers also cited travel time and language 
barriers as impediments to completing CDA 
certification. This suggests they are not 
sufficiently aware of recent developments in the 
CDA program, allowing for coursework to be 
completed online and in Spanish. See Section 
5-G for more details on this issue.
Reliance on Public Assistance
As Section 3-C demonstrates, FCC and GFCC 
providers earn such low take home pay that 
they live near the federal poverty level. As a 
result, they regularly qualify for and rely on 
public assistance programs. (See Figure 14.) 
Figure 13
CDA certificate interest
Currently have CDA
26%
20%
28%
Interested in obtaining a CDA
52%
54%
52%
Obstacle: No time
40%
36%
40%
Obstacle: Travel
26%
18%
28%
Obstacle: Language barriers
16%
18%
16%
All
FCC
GFCC
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Figure 14
Public assistance benefit utilization by providers
and their households
SNAP
22%
30%
20%
WIC
10%
6%
10%
Cash Assistance
2%
2%
2%
Someone in household receives
All
FCC
GFCC
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
25
Providers are self-employed and are, therefore, 
responsible for securing their own health 
insurance. Over half are on a public insurance 
plan, either because they qualify for Medicaid 
or, in some cases, receive Medicare or veterans’ 
benefits. (See Figure 15.) Only 20 percent of 
providers, largely GFCC providers, purchase 
their own health insurance on the market. Ten 
percent are uninsured. 
New York State offers both Medicaid, for 
households earning up to 138 percent of the 
federal poverty line (FPL), and the NYS Essential 
Plan, for households earning up to 250 percent 
of the FPL. Most providers, due to their low 
take home pay, qualify for either of these plans. 
Enrollment fluctuates with income; one-third 
of providers, largely GFCC providers, reported 
having lost health insurance in the past for this 
reason. 
Health insurance
Medicaid
52%
62%
50%
Medicare / VA
6%
8%
4%
Purchased directly (ACA marketplace, 
State’s Essential Plan, etc.)
20%
14%
22%
Union
2%
0%
2%
Spouse’s employer/union
10%
6%
12%
No health insurance
10%
10%
10%
Experienced disruption in health insurance 
due to business income fluctuation
30%
14%
32%
All
FCC
GFCC
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Figure 15

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
26
The primary goal of this research is to obtain 
a more precise estimate of providers’ take 
home pay and how dynamics with revenue and 
operating costs contribute to low take home 
pay. This section provides estimates of FCC and 
GFCC providers’ take home pay and compares 
the results to other ECE occupations. These 
estimates are drawn from extensive revenue 
and cost data provided by CNYCA survey 
participants, which are outlined first.
3-A. Revenue
In ECE programs, the majority of revenue 
is a product of the tuition price (or “rate”), 
typically calculated weekly and often based on 
the age of the child. In the estimated revenue 
results below, we calculate revenue for each 
FCC and GFCC provider surveyed using data 
they provided on rates and enrollment. (See 
Appendix B-3: Revenue Methodology.) 
“It's not an easy profession. And it does mean 
that, like, if you lose one student or lose a few 
students, you know, you might not be able to 
pay the rent that month...because the profit 
margin is so small.” – A., 36 years old, GFCC 
provider in Bushwick, Brooklyn.
We found that FCCs and GFCCs have low 
and unstable enrollment. (See Section 4-A.) 
Therefore, the estimated annual revenue 
presented below is low and likely insufficient 
for covering operating costs. (See Section 
3-B.) However, it is unwise to conclude that 
increasing enrollment will be sufficient to raise 
revenue and, therefore, take home pay. Before 
presenting the estimated annual revenue, we 
outline key findings about tuition rates and 
pricing dynamics. 
Weekly Private and Public Rates
Providers run private businesses that serve mixes 
of clients, including parents who: pay tuition 
themselves; receive CCAP subsidy vouchers; 
and sign up to attend 3-K or other programs 
funded by NYCPS. However, all of these tuition 
rates are rooted in the dynamic between 
private pay clients and providers, because of 
New York State’s choice to use a “market rate 
methodology” to determine rates for public 
programs. 
Numerous studies have demonstrated that 
this methodology is flawed and contributes 
to business instability and low take home pay 
(Workman and Jessen-Howard 2019, Workman 
and Capito 2023). With the exception of high-
income households, most New Yorkers cannot 
afford the true cost of care. So, providers charge 
parents what they can afford to pay, not what 
it costs to provide ECE. Using these private 
rates to determine public contracts therefore 
exacerbates the inability of ECE programs to 
cover their operating expenses. 
Figure 16 presents the rates providers reported 
they charge private clients and received 
for CCAP vouchers in 2023 alongside the 
maximum 2023 and 2024 CCAP voucher rates 
established by OCFS as a point of reference.7 
Providers’ reported voucher rates are important, 
because current New York State law requires 
that providers apply to receive the maximum 
CCAP voucher rate established by OCFS and 
prohibits them from applying for the most recent 
maximum rate unless they already charge their 
private clients this rate (or more). If a provider 
7 
 CCAP voucher rates are set every two years; the rate in effect 
in 2023 was the rate established in 2022. 
FCC and GFCC Business and Provider Income 
SECTION 3

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
27
doesn’t apply for the most recent maximum 
voucher rate, they will continue to receive the 
same CCAP voucher rate they received from the 
last time they applied. 
The bottom row of Figure 16 includes the 
estimated 2023 weekly rate, adjusted for 
inflation, from the baseline scenario in the 
“true cost of care” estimates produced for 
New York State by Simon Workman, co-
founder and principal of Prenatal to Five Fiscal 
Strategies (P5FS). This true cost of care weekly 
rate is derived from P5FS’s model using OCFS 
regulation, average local operating costs for 
relevant FCC and GFCC program expenses, and 
a “baseline” wage scenario where a provider has 
pay parity with a lead teacher in a center-based 
program and assistants earn the minimum wage. 
The baseline scenario is one of three wage 
scenarios presented in P5FS’s model. We chose 
it as a point of reference for Figure 16, because 
it is the most realistic cost of care comparison 
for the current policy landscape. This is not 
a recommendation of what the true cost of 
care should be; the baseline scenario wages 
are insufficient for the work, experience, and 
required training of providers and their staff. 
Figure 16 demonstrates that using a market 
is not an optimal way to determine the price 
of ECE. Providers’ average private pay rate is 
30 percent lower than the low-end baseline 
estimate of the true cost of care (for FCC 
providers) and 38 percent lower than the high-
end baseline estimate of the true cost of care 
(for GFCC providers). Using a market between 
providers and parents to determine private pay 
and CCAP voucher and contract rates results in 
severe underpayment for services. 
CNYCA’s survey data reveals signs of market 
failure and that providers have severely 
constrained bargaining power in their market. 
Private, CCAP voucher, and "cost of care" rates
2023 weekly full-time rates for FCC and GFCC providers
Private pay (Med)*
$325
$300
$275
$250
$175
$300
Private pay (Ave)*
$311
$291
$275
$225
$151
$292
Reported CCAP 
voucher (Med)
$319
$291
$265
$215
$292
Reported CCAP 
voucher (Ave)
$315
$292
$259
$211
$289
2023 CCAP 
voucher (Max)**
$325
$300
$275
$250
$300
2024 CCAP 
voucher (Max)
$400
$350
$325
$289
$358
Infant
Toddler
Pre-K
School-
age
12-
and-
older
Average
rate****
Figure 16

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
28
First, there is very little variation in private pay 
rates reported by providers. Given that there are 
neighborhoods with different average household 
income levels and that quality differences exist 
among ECE programs, we would expect to find 
more price variation. The lack of price variation, 
including comparing FCC and GFCC providers 
who have significantly different personnel 
requirements and variable costs, demonstrates 
that providers face serious constraints in setting 
their rates. 
Second, few providers had separate rates for 
children with special needs for us to analyze, 
so those results are not presented in Figure 
16. However, providers that do have separate 
rates for special needs by and large offer lower 
rates for children with special needs, not higher 
rates as might be expected given the extra care 
and attention many children with special needs 
require. This affirms what we know from our 
focus groups with providers: they are incredibly 
compassionate and often willing to negotiate 
their prices down to accommodate families in 
need. (See Section 4-C.)
Third, results in Figure 16 list both the average 
and median private pay rates of providers. 
In most cases, the median is higher than the 
average, meaning there are more extreme 
lower values pulling the average down. Like 
the results on pay differentials for children with 
special needs, this demonstrates that providers 
are constrained in their ability to set rates that 
cover their costs –even potentially in higher-
income neighborhoods – but are susceptible to 
negotiating their prices down. Further evidence 
of market failure is provided in Section 4-C. 
Our analysis also provides evidence for future 
policymaking regarding CCAP voucher rates and 
how providers access them. 
First, compared to the true cost of care baseline, 
we find that the maximum CCAP voucher 
rate available in 2023 was insufficient for 
covering the baseline required costs (including 
providers and staff wages that are woefully 
inadequate given their responsibilities, work 
hours, and experience). The OCFS market rate 
methodology that produces these regional 
rates resulted in significant increases in 2022 
and 2024 – the largest in over 20 years. (See 
Figure 17.) Part of this increase is due to 
State policymakers 
understanding that 
rates needed to be 
raised, culminating 
in a methodology 
change from setting 
the rate at the 80th 
percentile, instead of 
the 69th percentile.8 
However, Figure 16 
demonstrates that 
this adjustment is 
8 Every two years, providers in 
five New York State regions are 
surveyed about the rate they 
charge clients based on the age of 
the child. OCFS then determines 
what the 80th percentile provider 
in each region charges and 
establishes this as its maximum 
CCAP rate for the region.
FCC and GFCC weekly CCAP voucher rates
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
$340
Infant
Toddler
Pre-K
School-age
Source: CNYCA analysis of "New York State Child Care Market Rate Survey Report," 2000-2024, OCFS.
Figure 17

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
29
insufficient for addressing the disparity between 
current market prices and the true cost of care. 
Even the 2024 CCAP rate was still far short of 
covering the true cost of care in 2023. 
Lastly, Figure 16 demonstrates that the average 
provider is not receiving the maximum CCAP 
voucher rate. ACS worked hard during the 
Covid pandemic to make it easier for providers 
to apply for the most recent CCAP voucher 
rate through an “attestation form.” But those 
efforts have not eliminated the problem. Thirty 
percent of providers reported that they have 
not received the higher rates with the simplified 
attestation form. Additional issues and policy 
recommendations regarding this law are 
discussed further in Section 4-C. 
NYCPS Contract Rates
NYCPS relies heavily on centers, as well as 
FCCs and GFCCs, to deliver Pre-K and 3-K. The 
majority of providers who have taken advantage 
of this opportunity do so by joining a Family 
Child Care Network (FCCN). In fact, 20 percent 
of all FCC and GFCC providers subcontract 
with their FCCN, which holds the contract with 
NYCPS, to provide 3-K programming. When the 
City established the FCCN-affiliated provider 
contract, they set the weekly rates equivalent 
to the maximum CCAP voucher rate. This 
is troubling given that the maximum CCAP 
voucher rate doesn’t cover the true cost of care 
in an ECE program, much less one with higher 
requirements. 
Currently, providers receive the maximum 
2024 CCAP voucher rate ($325) if they have an 
extended-day contract (10 hours of care per 
day) and a reduced rate ($275) if they have a 
school-day contract (six hours and 20 minutes 
of care per day). For an additional 18 hours and 
20 minutes of care per week, providers are only 
receiving an additional $50 per week per child, 
or $2.73 per hour per child. 
Even more problematic is the disparity between 
the FCCN contract and what center-based 
programs receive to offer the same services. 
The current FCCN extended-day contract pays 
$16,900 per child per year, which is $10,573 
less than the $27,473 the City paid the average 
center-based program for offering the same 
service in City Fiscal Year 2025 (New York City 
Mayor’s Office of Operations 2025). For the 
school-day contract, FCCN-affiliated providers 
earn $9,900 per child per year in revenue 
– nearly half the $19,314 the average center-
based program received for offering the same 
service in FY 2025. This creates significant 
disparities between what home- and center-
based programs are able to offer, which is 
discussed further in Sections 4-B and 5-A. 
Other Income Sources
CACFP revenue
$3,309
$3,536
$9,539
$9,694
OCFS 
Workforce 
Retention Fund 
(reported)
$5,615
$7,362
$10,100
$13,897
Other income 
sources
FCC (median)
FCC (mean)
GFCC (median)
GFCC (mean)
Figure 18

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
30
GFCC providers are permitted to contract 
directly with NYCPS, though the number that 
do so is much smaller than providers that are 
FCCN-affiliated. Only four percent of survey 
participants had these direct contracts with 
NYCPS, which was not sufficient for CNYCA to 
estimate average NYCPS contract rates for these 
providers.
Other Income
In addition to tuition revenue, there are a few 
additional sources of revenue for providers 
which CNYCA collected survey data on and 
included in estimates of annual revenue. (See 
Figure 18.) 
First, providers reported the annual revenue 
they receive from the Child and Adult Care Food 
Program (CACFP). All providers are eligible to 
receive reimbursement for meals to children 
through this federally funded program. The 
majority participate in CACFP. (See Figure 
6.) Providers can receive reimbursements for 
up to two meals and one snack per attendee 
per day, and the government has different 
reimbursement rates based on whether or 
not the provider operates her business in a 
low-income area as defined by the federal 
government (United States Department of 
Agriculture 2016). Notably, center-based ECE 
programs have higher reimbursement rates 
than FCC and GFCC programs (New York State 
Department of Health 2025). Figure 18 presents 
the average and median reimbursements 
participating providers received in 2023. 
Comparing it to the food costs providers report 
in Figure 21, CACFP reimbursements do not 
cover the FCC provider’s food costs. However, 
the average GFCC provider’s food costs and 
CACFP reimbursement are similar. 
Second, providers reported the revenue they 
receive from the OCFS Workforce Retention 
Fund in 2023. This was the third year that grants 
were offered by OCFS to ECE programs to 
mitigate budget shortfalls during the pandemic 
using additional federal funding provided to 
states through the American Rescue Plan Act 
(ARPA) and the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and 
Economic Security (CARES) Act. Fifty-six percent 
of providers received the OCFS Stabilization 
Grant in 2021 and 52 percent received the 
OCFS Stabilization Grant in 2022. The third 
grant was designed to address low wages in 
the ECE sector, laying the foundation for a 
permanent wage subsidy program. (See Section 
6-E.) Sixty-six percent of providers received it. 
Total Revenue
CNYCA asked providers to report their annual 
revenue and also estimated it based on the 
elements described above. (See Appendix B-3: 
Revenue Methodology.) It is challenging to truly 
estimate annual revenue because enrollment 
(and attendance) fluctuations have a significant 
impact. CNYCA estimates assume that the 
enrollment reported by providers was consistent 
for the entire year. Additionally, our estimates 
do not take into account that providers struggle 
to collect payments for days that children are 
absent, both from private pay clients and the 
CCAP voucher program.9 (See Figure 27.) For 
these reasons, CNYCA likely over-estimates 
annual revenue. 
Figure 19 provides the percentage of FCC and 
GFCC providers whose estimated revenue is 
within certain ranges. In the true cost of care 
baseline scenario, an FCC provider would need 
$130,288 annual revenue and a GFCC provider 
would need $245,630 annual revenue (both 
inflation-adjusted for 2023) to break even. In 
2023, only 12 percent of FCC providers had 
annual revenue above $100,000 and only 13 
percent of GFCC providers had annual revenue 
above $200,000. Twenty-four percent of FCC 
providers and 14 percent of GFCC providers 
9 
 In 2023, New York State legislature increased the number of 
absences providers can be paid for without reducing CCAP voucher 
payments. New CCDF requirements, which OCFS must comply with 
by August 2026, will require that providers be paid on enrollment, not 
attendance moving forward. However, this will continue to be an issue 
with private pay clients. 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
31
brought in an estimated $10,000 or less per year 
– which can be largely attributed to extremely 
low enrollment.
Figure 20 presents the average reported 
and estimated revenue side-by-side for FCC 
and GFCC providers. Because revenue is so 
closely tied to enrollment, Figure 20 presents 
results for the average FCC provider with six 
or more enrolled children and the average 
GFCC provider with 10 or more. These “good 
enrollment” thresholds are used in P5FS’s true 
cost of care model and are utilized throughout 
this analysis to make comparisons to P5FS 
estimates. 
Across the board, CNYCA’s estimated revenues 
are higher than the average provider’s reported 
revenue. This is expected, given data limitations 
and methodological assumptions, such as steady 
enrollment and payment based on enrollment 
(not attendance), both of which are not currently 
common. However, even those with good 
enrollment do not have average revenue that 
comes close to revenue needed in the true cost 
of care baseline scenario. Increasing enrollment 
will not solve the problem of insufficient 
revenue. Rates must also increase to cover the 
true cost of care. 
3-B. Operating Costs
CNYCA collected data from providers about 
their current operating costs, in order to 
estimate FCC and GFCC provider take home 
pay and to better understand how costs 
contribute to low take home pay. However, 
Figure 19
FCC and GFCC Estimated Revenue
Includes all 2023 revenue sources (tuition, CACFP, and OCFS Workforce Retention
Fund)
$10,000 or less
$10,001 to $25,000
$25,001 to $50,000
$50,001 to $100,000
$100,001 to $200,000
$200,001 to $400,000
24%
18%
22%
25%
12%
FCC
14%
15%
9%
15%
33%
13%
GFCC
Analysis excludes providers who had zero children enrolled in 2023. Number of providers surveyed = 408
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
32
current operating costs, in a financially 
constrained setting, should not be equated 
with the true cost of care, a term that is used 
throughout this paper to describe what the costs 
of operating an ECE program should be, given 
prices of necessary inputs (i.e. rent/mortgage, 
food, insurance, etc.) and with necessary salaries 
and benefits for a stable workforce that can 
provide high-quality care. This section includes 
results from CNYCA’s survey and a comparison 
to estimates from P5FS’s true cost of care model.
Figure 21 provides average operating costs by 
category. They include the cost of staff wages, 
but not the cost of a provider’s take home pay. 
However, some other personnel costs, like 
health insurance and retirement benefits, can 
be assumed to cover both staff and providers. 
There are some living costs (i.e. rent/mortgage 
and all utility bills) only a portion of which, 
in accordance with Internal Revenue Service 
standards, should be considered business 
expenses. Results for these costs presented in 
Figure 21 are weighted based on the time-space 
percentage reported by each provider. (See 
Appendix B-4: Operating Costs Methodology.) 
Results on FCC and GFCC providers are shown 
separately, because their capacity differences 
lead to substantially different fixed and variable 
costs. For example, a GFCC needs more 
residential space (fixed cost) and food (variable 
cost) to serve a larger number of children. 
Results include costs for the average FCC and 
GFCC provider, as well as the average FCC 
and GFCC provider with good enrollment, to 
compare to P5FS’s true cost of care model.

Figure 20
Comparing providers' actual revenue to necessary
revenue to cover true cost of care
2023 annual revenue
50K
100K
150K
200K
$48,336
$81,531
$130,288
$81,742
$134,140
$245,630
FCC (with 6 or more enrolled)
GFCC (with 10 or more enrolled)
Reported
Estimated
True cost of care baseline scenario
Number of providers surveyed = 219
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024; CNYCA analysis of Simon Workman and
Steven Jessen-Howard, “New York State Cost of Quality Child Care Study,” adjusted for inflation.

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
33
 
There is little variability in terms of individual 
cost categories and total operating costs. Values 
highlighted in yellow in Figure 21 are those with 
large variations in responses; in most cases, 
Average FCC and GFCC program costs
2023 annual costs
Results highlighted in yellow have large variation (with a coefficient of variation
greater than 2.0)
Cost
All
With 6
or more
enrolled
All
With 10
or more
enrolled
All
Total annual costs
$26,696
$39,906
$74,015
$92,994
$66,901
Total non-personnel 
costs
$15,127
$21,820
$29,247
$35,407
$26,268
Rent/Mortgage*
$6,795
$6,714
$12,935
$13,954
$12,046
Electricity*
$834
$1,020
$1,458
$1,612
$1,372
Gas*
$318
$257
$723
$787
$663
Water*
$53
$12
$89
$102
$84
Telephone and 
internet*
$757
$786
$1,211
$1,213
$1,146
Food
$4,229
$6,894
$9,404
$12,712
$8,668
Cleaning
$1,862
$2,150
$2,441
$2,601
$2,350
Repairs
$1,382
$1,651
$2,483
$2,621
$2,315
Staff wages
$10,716
$17,510
$43,160
$55,750
$39,139
Health insurance
$566
$292
$803
$821
$770
Insurance (other)
$953
$1,014
$2,520
$3,082
$2,287
Tax prep
$538
$803
$1,489
$1,574
$1,352
Licenses, permits, 
background checks
$237
$243
$287
$296
$280
Membership dues
$114
$217
$162
$182
$154
Payroll services
$253
$332
$1,206
$1,498
$1,094
Marketing
$568
$734
$935
$878
$883
Professional training
$324
$517
$885
$878
$809
Retirement fund 
contributions
$288
$283
$805
$1,015
$724
Taxes
$829
$1,256
$5,979
$8,791
$5,334
Other supplies
$1,695
$2,148
$3,107
$3,455
$2,917
Transportation
$1,424
$1,566
$2,096
$2,086
$2,001
Other costs
$101
$24
$663
$1,027
$580
FCC
GFCC
All
*Results were weighted using the time-space percentage reported by each provider
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Figure 21
many providers currently have zero costs in 
those categories. For example, the majority of 
providers are renters and do not pay a water bill. 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
34
Comparing Current Costs to the True 
Cost of Care
Understanding operating costs is necessary 
for evaluating the sufficiency of current CCAP 
voucher and NYCPS contract rates as well as 
improving the methodologies for calculating 
those rates. 
Figure 22 compares the average current 
operating expenses of providers with good 
enrollment to P5FS’s 2019 true cost of 
care model for the base scenario (adjusted 
for inflation), assuming the same levels of 
enrollment. It compares full operating costs 
(excluding provider take home pay) and non-
personnel costs (excluding staff wages and 
health insurance benefits). 
Figure 22 demonstrates that FCC and GFCC 
providers are severely financially constrained. 
The gap between current and true operating 
costs, even when excluding the most important 
cost – staff wages and benefits – is significant. 
High operating costs are not a significant driver 
of low take home pay. Instead, revenue is too 
low and unreliable for these business owners. 
3-C. Take Home Pay
“So, in the beginning, I undercut myself…You 
want to get people in and you'll start low, which 
I did, and yeah, it did get people in. But then I 
realized I was subsidizing the daycare out of my 
salary…I wasn't getting a salary.” – T., 52-year-
old provider in Central Harlem, Manhattan.
Providers’ take home pay depends on earning 
revenue above operating costs. (See Appendix 
B-5 Take home Pay Methodology.) Variations 
between FCCs and GFCCs make it challenging 
to find one number to encapsulate personal 
earnings. Figure 23 presents the average and 
median annual and hourly take home pay, 
broken down by license type (FCC or GFCC), 
by enrollment level, and with two different 
calculations for hourly pay.
Comparing current costs to true cost of care
Average 2023 annual costs
FCC costs*
$39,906
$79,004
-$39,098
FCC non-personnel 
costs**
$21,820
$55,900
-$34,080
GFCC costs*
$92,994
$194,347
-$101,353
GFCC non-
personnel costs**
$35,407
$129,516
-$94,109
CNYCA Survey
True cost of care 
baseline scenario
Difference
Analysis only includes FCC providers with 6 or more enrolled and GFCC providers with 10 or more enrolled.
Number of providers surveyed = 219
*Average costs includes staff wages, but excludes provider take-home pay.
**Non-personnel costs excludes all wages and health insurance costs.
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024; CNYCA analysis of Simon Workman and
Steven Jessen-Howard, “New York State Cost of quality child care study,” adjusted for inflation.
Figure 22

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
35
During focus groups, one provider estimated the 
average provider salary. She was spot on: 
“We make about $6 an hour, but we need to 
pay [staff] $16.50.” – Y., 32-year-old GFCC 
provider in the Northeast Bronx.
Overall, we find that the average FCC and GFCC 
provider earned less than the minimum wage in 
2023 ($15 per hour) even when accounting for 
open business hours only. The median FCC or 
GFCC provider with good enrollment was able 
to earn more than the minimum wage but only 
if you exclude from these calculations the 21 
additional hours they work beyond their open 
business hours. 
Given the high variation in the data, Figure 
23 presents the average and median annual 
take home pay and hourly take home pay. This 
provides meaningful insights. When the median 
is higher than the average, as it is for FCC and 
GFCC providers with a minimum number of 
children enrolled as well as all FCC providers, 
there are more very low values in the data that 
are pulling the average down. When the median 
is lower than the average, as it is for all GFCC 
providers as well as all providers (both with and 
without a minimum number of children enrolled), 
there are more very high values that are pulling 
the average up. 
Importantly, estimated take home pay only 
compensates providers for their labor time after 
subtracting operating expenses. It doesn’t factor 
in many business start-up costs. Additionally, 
FCC and GFCC provider take-home pay
All*
With 6 or
more
enrolled
All*
With 10
or more
enrolled
All*
With 6 or
more
enrolled
Annual take-home 
pay (ave)
$18,566
$41,625
$25,440
$41,147
$24,148
$31,034
Annual take-home 
pay (med)
$19,047
$58,666
$15,431
$47,942
$15,485
$29,942
Hourly pay #1 (ave)
$6.84
$15.00
$9.83
$15.89
$9.29
$11.95
Hourly pay #1 
(med)
$7.33
$18.84
$5.98
$17.62
$6.01
$11.20
Hourly pay #2 (ave)
$5.09
$11.53
$6.18
$9.87
$5.93
$7.47
Hourly pay #2 
(med)
$4.81
$15.52
$4.16
$11.07
$4.30
$7.58
FCC
GFCC
All
"Hourly pay #1" uses the provider’s open business hours only. "Hourly pay #2" includes both open business hours and additional
working hours each provider reported (see Section 2-A).
*Excluding providers who had zero children enrolled in 2023. Number of providers surveyed = 408
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Figure 23

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
36
business owners expect to earn profits on their 
invested capital (such as the home and furniture 
which depreciates more with intensive use) or 
to be compensated for the risks they bear (of 
which this report describes many). Providers 
are, in fact, responsible for all start-up costs 
related to their businesses – from renting space 
to purchasing supplies to getting background 
checks for their employees – and are currently 
paid by government agencies only after services 
are delivered. Providers, then, are expected to 
take on a lot of upfront risks, like any business 
owners, and their compensation should include 
some acknowledgment of this. Therefore, if we 
were to include a reasonable profit rate into our 
calculation of take home pay, the estimates in 
Figure 23 would be even lower.
Comparing Providers’ Income to Other 
ECE Occupations
Figure 24 provides estimates of the hourly 
wages of FCC and GFCC providers in 
comparison to other ECE workers by occupation 
and program type. The number of hours per 
week and per year worked vary greatly within 
the ECE workforce – with many employees 
in a Pre-K and 3-K settings working part-time 
Median wage by ECE occupation and program
2023
$36.92
$48.08
$23.08
$31.25
$13.85$13.33
$7.33
$18.84
$5.98
$17.62
Director ------------
Pre-K teacher -----
ECE worker** -----
--------- FCC
---------- GFCC
Center (non-profit)
Public
All
With "good" enrollment*
minimum wage in 
2023 was $15
*With "good" enrollment is defined as an FCC with 6 or more children enrolled or a GFCC with 10 or more
children enrolled.
**ECE worker includes lead and assistant educators.
Excluding providers who had zero children enrolled in 2023. Number of providers surveyed = 408
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024; CNYCA analysis of American Community
Survey 2023 5-Year Data, U.S. Census Bureau
Figure 24
Pre-K teacher 
ECE worker** 
FCC
- GFCC

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
37
and seasonally, while workers in a center- or 
home-based-program work year-round. Hourly 
wages, then, provide a better comparison than 
annual income. For this comparison, we use the 
estimate for hourly pay (Figure 23, #1 above), 
which only includes open business hours in 
the hourly wage calculation. We make this 
choice, which undoubtedly overestimates hourly 
earnings, because the ECE sector is known for 
under-compensating workers for planning time 
in many occupations. The data used to estimate 
the wages of other ECE workers does not 
account for uncompensated planning time, so 
hourly pay (Figure 23 #1) is the best estimate to 
use.
Figure 24 highlights the bleak earnings of FCC 
and GFCC providers. The median FCC or GFCC 
provider earns less per hour than ECE workers 
(which includes lead and assistant educators, 
who are not certified Pre-K teachers). Even when 
controlling for good enrollment, FCC and GFCC 
providers earn approximately half the hourly 
wage of the occupation most similarly aligned 
with them: center directors. 
Policymakers are currently charged with 
developing a career ladder for the ECE sector. 
Policy experts have discussed at length which 
occupation providers should have pay parity 
with. A group of policy experts, led by CUNY’s 
Professional Development Institute and 
Jenn O'Connor, principal at Jenn O'Connor 
Consulting, LLC, has developed an ECE 
sector-wide career ladder that acknowledges 
occupation, credentials, and work experience. 
In this framework, FCC and GFCC providers 
are on the same career ladder as directors.10 
This doesn’t mean that directors and providers 
will always make the same salary, given that 
current regulated educational requirements 
and pay standards in the ECE sector result in 
the average provider having lower educational 
attainment than the average director. However, 
if such a career ladder was embraced by 
policymakers (and integrated into voucher rates 
and contracts), a provider and director would 
have pay parity if they had equal educational 
attainment and years of experience. Figure 24 
illustrates that there is significant pay disparity 
today between providers and directors. Policy 
reforms are needed to address this pay disparity. 
See Section 6-C for more discussion on the 
benefits and impact of a 
sector-wide ECE career 
ladder. 
10 
 This assessment of where to 
place providers on a career ladder is 
aligned with the evolution of P5FS’s 
New York models. While in their 2019 
true cost of care model, P5FS assumes 
FCC and GFCC providers should have 
pay parity with lead teachers, in their 
2023 model P5FS assumes FCC and 
GFCC providers should have a salary 
that is closer to, though not equal to, a 
director.
Figure 25
Average enrollment by age
Number of enrolled children
5
10
15
1.1
2.1
0.8
2.8
1
2.2
1.1
1.6
0
0.2
4.1
8.8
Infants
Toddlers
3-5 year-olds
School-age
12 and older
Total children
FCC
GFCC
FCC total capacity 
is 8 children
GFCC total capacity 
is 16 children
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
38
There are four main drivers of low revenue 
and provider take home pay: low and unstable 
enrollment, current city program design and 
promotion, market failure and the government’s 
“market rate methodology,” and costs. In 
this section, we address each of these topics, 
drawing on data collected from CNYCA’s survey 
and focus groups with providers.
 
4-A. Low and Unstable Enrollment
CNYCA’s survey results show that FCCs and 
GFCCs are severely under-enrolled. In 2023, 
the average FCC and GFCC were operating at 
approximately half capacity. (See Figure 25 and 
Appendix A: Glossary.)
CNYCA analyzed survey data to determine if 
having a NYCPS contract had any impact on 
enrollment. The answer: no. 
In the analysis of take home pay in Section 
3-C, we provide results for providers with 
good enrollment. The impact on take home 
pay is significant. While the median FCC and 
GFCC provider earned $7.33 and $5.98 per 
hour, respectively, their hourly wage increases 
threefold if they have good enrollment, to 
$18.84 and $17.62, respectively. However, 
only 29 percent of the FCC providers and 51 
percent of GFCC providers surveyed had good 
enrollment in 2023. 
CNYCA attempted to compile a comprehensive 
list of all ECE seats across all City agencies to 
determine if enrollment correlated with excess 
supply by neighborhood. However, we were 
unable to acquire all of the data to do so. This 
is a sign that the City is currently unaware of the 
existing supply as well. While we were unable to 
obtain sufficient data to do this neighborhood-
level analysis, low enrollment signifies that they 
challenge parents face accessing ECE is not lack 
of supply, but the inability to afford the price of 
care outside of subsidized options. 
Survey participants were asked to compare their 
enrollment to other time periods, including 
before the Covid pandemic and before the 
expansion of Pre-K and 3-K. The overall trend for 
both FCC and GFCC providers was decreased 
enrollment after each of these events. (See 
Section 4-B.) The enrollment levels in Figure 25, 
then, are not an aberration. In fact, they are the 
result of a decade-long decline in enrollment 
for the majority of providers. It is not surprising, 
then, that enrollment has not rebounded five 
years after the pandemic started. Other factors, 
primarily the design of Pre-K and 3-K, have 
had an impact on FCC and GFCC program 
enrollment. 
Personal Strategies
Providers overwhelmingly attribute their 
enrollment successes to their own direct 
marketing. Because word of mouth is the 
most successful strategy, it's not surprising 
that providers mentioned their enrollment 
increased over time. Others mentioned that 
prior experience in ECE or education provides 
a pipeline to parents and trusted messengers. 
Providers also mentioned a variety of targeted 
marketing and outreach they conduct: placing 
flyers in businesses and institutions in their 
community that parents frequent; participating 
What Drives Inadequate Revenue 
and Low Take Home Pay?
SECTION 4

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
39
in online parent groups; having a presence at 
neighborhood events; posting signs on-site; and 
seeing outdoor excursions to the playground 
as an opportunity to connect with potential 
clients. Comfort with technology also influenced 
providers’ choice of direct marketing strategies.
Neighborhood dynamics as well as competition 
with other programs within the neighborhood 
was widely discussed. For example, one provider 
mentioned that she experiences high turnover, 
because the majority of children in her vicinity 
now live in shelters and move frequently, as 
families struggle to secure permanent housing. 
Some providers describe their neighborhood 
as highly populated with families with young 
children. In these settings, some providers can 
withstand strong competition with other ECE 
programs. Some describe developing good 
rapport with other ECE programs in the area, 
where it becomes common to refer parents to 
each other’s programs when one has reached 
maximum enrollment. 
Less prevalent in focus group discussions were 
providers who attributed any of their enrollment 
to government agency efforts (including 
promotion of CCAP and NYCPS programs or 
online directories maintained by government 
agencies). Furthermore, providers had a huge 
variation in their experiences with FCCNs. While 
some attributed enrollment to FCCN efforts, 
others were disappointed that enrollment had 
not increased as a result of joining an FCCN. 
Systemic Challenges
Despite different personal strategies, providers 
share similar challenges with how government 
programs affect enrollment.
CCAP Voucher Application Process: The 
process of applying for a CCAP voucher can 
take months. It is also so overly complicated 
that many parents who qualify for a voucher 
are unable to receive one simply because they 
cannot navigate the process. As the State 
increases eligibility for CCAP vouchers to make 
subsidized care available to more families, 
this slow enrollment process increasingly 
impacts providers’ ability to fill seats. Providers 
often choose to address this long application 
process time by caring for children before 
their enrollment paperwork has been finalized, 
hoping the paperwork will ultimately be 
accepted and the provider will be able to back-
date the voucher to receive payment for that 
work. Many providers take this risky action to 
"guarantee" (as much as possible) the child will 
stay with them after the voucher is finalized, but 
this often results in providers working for free 
for months. If it isn’t, providers know it is nearly 
impossible to ask parents to cover the cost, 
because they know parents cannot afford it. 
While ACS has eliminated all application and 
enrollment paperwork backlogs, the process 
could be further improved if OCFS simplified 
the CCAP application itself. Advocates have also 
called on the City to implement presumptive 
eligibility for CCAP vouchers. Federal Child Care 
Development Fund (CCDF) rules permit states 
to cover the cost of care while family eligibility 
is being determined. In 2024, Governor Hochul 
signed a law that permits Local Departments 
of Social Services (LDSSs) to implement such 
presumptive eligibility. ACS could implement 
this policy.
Sufficient funding and agency staffing are 
also necessary to prevent future application 
processing delays and confusion. There are 
currently thousands of families on ACS’s CCAP 
voucher waitlist, because there are insufficient 
funds allocated to the program. In 2025, the 
City ran out of State CCBG funding for CCAP 
vouchers. While additional State and City dollars 
were subsequently added to the City budget 
for the current fiscal year, a more long-term 
funding agreement between the City and State 
is needed.
“I do think the process is overly complicated. 
And a lot of parents find it really hard to 
navigate applying for childcare. And yeah, a 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
40
lot of times the cases fall through, because…
they don't know they can't reach a person that 
works…at those offices…And sometimes they 
don't speak the language or of whoever is 
there, and it's hard for them to navigate that 
process.” – C., 30-year-old GFCC provider in 
East Tremont/Crotona, the Bronx.
“Before they [vouchers] were approved fast…
The parents only had to bring in a copy of our 
license and that was enough. Now, for the 
parents to get approval it can take 6 months 
to a year.” – N., 54-year-old GFCC provider in 
Bedford Park/Fordham, the Bronx.
NYCPS Central Enrollment: The City 
encourages parents to apply for 3-K or Pre-K 
slots during a January-February open enrollment 
period, using the MySchools.nyc.gov website 
and ranking programs in preferential order. This 
is problematic for a number of reasons.
The website doesn’t sufficiently describe 
different program modalities, including the 
benefits of using FCC and GFCC programs. 
Providers reported numerous examples of 
parents, some of whom are existing clients, who 
have selected their programs as their top 3-K 
choice but have not been able to enroll in their 
programs. 
Each April or May, NYCPS creates lists of families 
receiving offers of 3-K and Pre-K placements. 
However, since most providers contracting 
with NYCPS are affiliated with an FCCN 
“middle man,” it’s the FCCN, not the individual 
providers, who get those lists. It’s unclear how 
FCCN staff distribute enrolled children among 
member providers. This leaves providers in 
the dark about how many children have been 
offered a space at their program. They’re also 
unable to meaningfully engage with parents 
before the parental June application deadline, 
even while center-based programs that do have 
access to the family offer list are doing so as a 
strategy to increase enrollment. 
Parents who miss the open enrollment period 
can sign up for 3-K after the start of school, 
using MySchools.nyc.gov to find available FCC 
and GFCC programs. However, the website 
lists FCCN staff as the contact for each site, 
an additional barrier between providers and 
interested clients. 
Some providers also report that their FCCN 
contracts require they be fully enrolled to 
receive full payment. If even one child leaves 
during the 3-K contract, that leads to lower 
payments. Because providers cannot directly 
recruit families to fill that newly open 3-K seat, 
these lower payments can persist for the entire 
school year, affecting providers’ ability to 
maintain salary and meet other costs.
In short, these arrangements have generally 
not yielded good results for FCCN-affiliated 
providers. They also constrain providers’ ability 
to retain existing clients who are ready for 
3-K, undermining one of the evidence-based 
priorities for early care and education: long-term 
relationships and bonding between children and 
their educators.
“If parents’ first choice is our childcare, the 
government should assign the child to us, 
not the childcare under the Department of 
Education. That's unfair to us. It's a problem. 
I've come across this a lot. They assign our child 
to other childcare, not according to the parents' 
wishes. Privately, we have done a lot to promote 
our childcare. Parents finally agreed to come, 
but the Department of Education assigned the 
child to another childcare. All our efforts were in 
vain.” –Ll, 39-year-old provider in Bensonhurst, 
Brooklyn.
“This year, too, every parent chose my school, 
but the Department of Education hasn't 
assigned me any children. This is the biggest 
problem. Because of this, our small childcare 
has worked so hard to provide care for children 
from very young age to older age and parents 
are happy to stay with us, but the Department 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
41
of Education won't give us children.” – Yl, 
50-year-old provider in Sheepshead Bay, 
Brooklyn.
 
“One of our families left our 3-K in March 
because they were moving, and I had to find 
somebody to take over their spot. Because 
if you don't have enough enrollment, DOE 
doesn't give you enough money. They take 
away your funding ...which is crazy because you 
still have to pay teacher’s salary, still have to pay 
the same rent, you still have to pay the same 
for everything.” – S., 36-year-old provider in 
Flatbush/Midwood, Brooklyn.
4-B. Public Program Design and 
Promotion
Emergency Covid-era federal funds supported 
statewide initiatives to stabilize child care 
programs and their workforces. But these efforts 
were temporary, based on an assumption that 
disruptions in ECE were pandemic-related and 
that a fully recovered New York economy would 
be able to support ECE programs.
While pandemic shocks were real, ECE programs 
had also experienced instability well before the 
pandemic. CNYCA survey results find that the 
launch of Pre-K in 2014 and 3-K in 2017 had 
as great, or even greater, effects on FCC and 
GFCC enrollment and revenue. (See Figure 26.) 
Very few providers have seen their enrollment 
increase over the past 10 years. This points 
to a problem with public program design and 
promotion, both for providers who participate in 
the 3-K program and those who do not.
Competition with 3-K and Pre-K: Universal and 
free 3-K and Pre-K programs present a plethora 
of challenges for providers. Prior to their launch, 
providers would enroll children at the age of two 
Comparing 2023 enrollment to previous periods
Percent of survey participants who had direct experience
Decreased
Increased
Stayed
Same
Decreased
Increased
Stayed
Same
Pre-
pandemic 
(2019)
60%
16%
24%
48%
30%
22%
Before 3-
K-For-All 
started 
(2017)
36%
12%
26%
48%
18%
18%
Before 
Pre-K-For-
All started 
(2014)
32%
6%
38%
46%
14%
14%
FCC
GFCC
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Figure 26

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
42
or younger. Typically, that child would remain 
enrolled until kindergarten (and even continue 
as an after-school client because of the strong 
bond established over multiple years). Now 
children may only stay enrolled for a year or two. 
If a provider runs a 3-K program, they may be 
able to retain the child for an extra year but the 
centralized NYCPS enrollment process doesn’t 
guarantee this. The result: more turnover in FCC 
and GFCC seats.
“It's hard to fill your programs now because you 
can have these children come at infancy. And 
then by the time they're three, the parents are 
taking them out. Whereas before Pre-K-For-All, 
before Covid, if you had a child that was in your 
program, the likelihood is that…they was there 
0 to 10 years old, 0 to 8. Now they're leaving 
you at three years old.” – S., 46-year-old GFCC 
provider in East New York, Brooklyn.
“The most important thing is subsidized 
childcare. It covers until age three. Pre-K kids 
will leave because of the money. We don't 
have Pre-K…Before 3-K or Pre-K program, our 
children stayed until they were five, sometimes 
until they were six. They left after finishing 
kindergarten. Now, because of money, they 
transfer…We don't have ACS program, nor 
pre-K. Parents say, "Teacher H****, I really want 
to stay, but I don't have the money. I need these 
subsidies." – W., 50- year-old GFCC provider in 
Flushing, Queens.
If they can afford the resulting lost income, many 
working parents want to be home with a child 
during its first few years of life, or share childcare 
with another family member, like a grandparent. 
This means lower ECE uptake rates among 
families with children younger than two. The 
launch of Pre-K and 3-K made recruiting families 
with young children even more challenging for 
FCC and GFCC programs. While 20 percent 
of FCC and GFCC programs offer 3-K slots, 
enrollment is centralized, run by NYCPS and 
distributed through FCCNs. Additionally, 
providers report center-based programs in their 
area offering both 3-K and Pre-K tell parents 
they have to enroll at the center for 3-K to 
guarantee a seat for Pre-K. Providers, then, are 
rarely able to recruit pre-school-aged children 
directly anymore. 
“There were so many requests for children 
under two. Because I had so many children 
in September, I hired an extra teacher. I hired 
six people with three teachers. With six staff, I 
could only fill ten slots. We had to fill ten slots. I 
have ten students, three teachers, and rent, and 
it's less than even working part-time, right?... 
the large 3K program has the ratio of one 
teacher to four children, while we can only have 
one teacher care for two children under two 
years old. If we have the ratio of one teacher to 
three children, our life might be a little easier.” – 
H., GFCC provider in Flushing, Queens
4-C. Market Failure and the 
Government’s “Market Rate 
Methodology”
Market failure describes situations where 
there is an acute mismatch between supply 
and demand, because the agreed upon price 
doesn’t work for both the buyer and the 
seller. The ECE market is broken, because, as 
Section 3 demonstrates, providers are unable 
to cover their operating expenses. This results 
in the inability to pay themselves and their 
staff adequately, with impacts on the quality 
of the services they deliver. In this section, we 
provide additional evidence about the inability 
of parents to pay the rates providers set, both 
impeding their access to ECE and putting 
downward pressure on revenue for FCC and 
GFCC programs. 
The problem with the ECE market is not that 
providers don’t know how to set prices. In fact, 
they use a mix of common business methods 
to do so. This includes a cost-based approach. 
Numerous providers described a pricing 
worksheet developed specifically for FCC and 
GFCC programs to determine what price of 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
43
service will cover their own costs. They also do 
market research, including assessing the rates of 
nearby ECE programs to determine “what the 
market can bear.” Many providers have price 
differentials for different age groups; some set 
part-time rates at greater than half full-time 
rates to incentivize full-time clients. Some offer 
discounts to parents with more than one child. 
Providers are also acutely aware that parents 
can’t pay “true cost of care” rates. They report 
using two strategies in response. In the interest 
of transparency and uniformity, some choose to 
offer the admittedly insufficient CCAP voucher 
rate to private clients. This has the ancillary 
benefit of allowing them to obtain the maximum 
CCAP rate for clients using CCAP vouchers.
The second and much more common approach 
is to have a target rate in mind and negotiate 
down based on a range of factors. Some 
establish a sliding scale and ask parents to 
provide a pay stub to determine what discount 
they will offer. Many described the emotional 
conversations they have with parents, who cry 
and beg, in discussions about rates. Other 
providers simply know, from years of experience 
with local families, that parents cannot afford 
their target rate. Providers are also more willing 
to negotiate prices down if they have or have 
had low enrollment. 
“I need to survive, so I'll do it no matter how 
low the price is.” – L., 39-year-old FCC provider 
in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn.
“I won't sell myself short, but I will definitely 
lower my rate for a parent that I know she's 
going to continue to…pay on time, because at 
this point, the way that the child care system is 
set up ... you can't even afford to lose that child. 
So, if you got to take a couple of hundreds less 
than what you get from the state, then I'll work 
with parents to do that, because that's just what 
it is.” -T., 37-year-old GFCC provider in Hunts 
Point, Bronx.
There are many reasonable explanations for 
ECE market failure. First, ECE is labor intensive. 
High staffing ratios are required to meet health 
and safety standards and to guarantee high-
quality care, which benefits families and society. 
Meanwhile, parents of young children are 
typically early or mid-career adults. They aren’t 
financially able to pay for the full cost (and long-
term benefits) of ECE upfront. 
The city’s 3-K and Pre-K programs offer a clear 
alternative. Its costs are not paid directly by 
young families. They are public goods made 
available through a mix of federal funding and 
local tax revenue. 
The Government’s “Market Rate 
Methodology”: Current New York State 
regulation leads to further market failure. 
Providers are currently required to apply 
to receive an increase to the most recent 
maximum CCAP voucher rate that results 
from OCFS’s market rate methodology every 
two years. The current application process is 
a simplified, attestation form; it replaces an 
earlier application process providers regarded 
as too onerous to use. (The result was that 
many providers continued to be paid at the rate 
they had received when they first accepted a 
CCAP voucher recipient – as much as 10 years 
previously.) 
The new attestation form has increased the 
number of providers receiving the maximum 
CCAP voucher rate. But it has also created 
a new problem: confusion among providers 
about their autonomy in setting rates for private 
clients. 
“I just follow the rates that we have, that they 
set the market rate. It's just basically a flat rate 
we can't go below. Right? We could go above, 
but it's hard as it is. Right?” – H., GFCC provider 
in Flatbush/Midwood, Brooklyn.
Providers overwhelmingly understand the 
attestation form to mean that, if you want the 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
44
maximum CCAP voucher rate, you must charge 
private clients the same rate. This creates 
another opportunity for market failure: providers 
and parents are not arriving at an equilibrium 
price, because providers fear it will impact their 
ability to obtain the maximum CCAP voucher 
rate. If that’s true, OCFS’s market rate study 
becomes a self-reinforcing cycle impeding 
reliable price setting. 
4-D. Costs
As Section 3 highlights, FCC and GFCC 
providers respond to their financial constraints 
by keeping costs low. This, however, is not a 
good outcome. In fact, one issue that came up 
repeatedly in focus groups was the resulting 
inability to spend money to make their 
businesses run optimally and with high quality. 
For example, focus group participants discussed 
wanting to increase staff wages and benefits. 
(See Section 5-A.) 
That means policymakers should find ways 
to bring costs down for providers without 
impacting business quality or increasing working 
hours. This could include the State or City 
developing a comprehensive and affordable 
pooled risk benefits package or prioritizing 
providers in the distribution of housing vouchers 
offsetting rental costs. 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
45
While they are at the top of the list, inadequate 
revenue and low take home pay are not the 
only challenges to program quality and stability 
providers shared. This section provides insight 
on a number of these other issues.
5-A. Recruiting and Retaining 
Experienced Staff
ECE is a labor-intensive industry. According to 
the Center for American Progress, 68 cents of 
every dollar spent at a child care program goes 
towards staff wages and benefits (Center for 
American Progress 2018). 
The problem of recruiting and retaining staff is 
primarily due to insufficient business revenue 
that makes it impossible to offer competitive 
wages and benefits. The resulting high turnover 
weakens critically important long-term bonds to 
children and parents. 
Because of lower rates per seat and higher 
staffing ratios, FCC and GFCC providers 
are severely constrained in offering wages 
and benefits comparable to those offered at 
center-based and public programs. They are 
particularly concerned about their inability to 
afford benefits, since even a minimum wage 
earner working full-time is not income-eligible 
for Medicaid. 
Personal Values and Strategies
“I want parents to be as comfortable as 
possible. I'm very careful with who I allow in 
here and around the children. And I also have 
small babies, and I have special needs children. 
And my son is also special needs…I like to have 
a complete background check. I like to know 
them from somewhere or somebody who tells 
Additional Challenges Impacting Program Quality and Stability
SECTION 5
me that they're good. And then I have them 
work with me for a little while as well before I 
make any final decisions.” -An., 39-year-old FCC 
provider in East Harlem, Manhattan.
Providers have an average of 10 years of 
experience running their businesses and have 
clear ideas of what they look for in employees. 
They have also developed thoughtful vetting 
and training processes.
Providers look for staff who have experience 
in the field (including with particular age 
groups) and are responsible, patient, and 
warm in interactions with children. Trust is also 
key; they are inviting staff into their homes to 
work with a vulnerable population. As a result, 
many providers limit their staff recruitment to 
family and friends. The lengthy process to get 
staff approved by DOHMH and the upfront 
costs related to that (such as CPR training and 
background checks), result in many providers 
using a trial period to test out new staff 
(whose fingerprints have been cleared) before 
completing the full hiring and training process. 
Systemic Challenges
“I wish I could pay them more, much more, 
because they do their CDA, their credentials, 
everything. Then there are home attendant jobs 
that pay $20, $22 an hour. What are people 
going to do if they have papers, work permits? 
They would rather leave.” – T., 43-year-old 
GFCC provider in Bushwick, Brooklyn.
“Every time we hire someone, we can't expect 
them to be professional, right? It doesn't matter 
if you don't know how to do it. I'll teach you. 
Once he has learned, he will leave. He wants 
to find a better position, one with a higher 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
46
salary and better benefits. We can't offer any 
benefits, right? We're just a stepping stone. If 
we offer benefits, we'll be left with nothing, not 
a penny.” – W., 49-year-old GFCC provider in 
Flushing, Queens.
There are two other challenges providers face in 
retaining staff. First, the process of getting staff 
cleared to work can take up to a year. A lack of 
transparency about the process increases stress 
for providers and new staff hires. This can lead 
to providers’ losing qualified staff who cannot 
wait out this process, and to losing families who 
cannot use available seats without additional 
staff in place. 
DOHMH and OCFS have no published target 
processing time that providers and staff can 
use to set expectations regarding this process. 
Providers also report that it is nearly impossible 
to talk to anyone at these agencies to get a clear 
update of where an application is in the process. 
This poor communication also leads staff to 
walk away from work in the ECE field. While 
OCFS has made changes recently to its Facility 
Application and Management System (FAMS) to 
reduce processing time, it also acknowledges 
the process is particularly long for people who 
have worked out of state or have anything 
flagged on their background check.
Second, given fluctuations in enrollment, 
providers have to choose between two 
problematic scenarios. They either must ask 
staff to accommodate variation in weekly hours 
worked, which may prompt them to instead find 
additional part-time work or a job that provides 
more stable hours. Or they have to pay for staff 
when enrollment does not justify it, which limits 
their own revenue and take home pay. 
“I want to bring another staff member. I want 
to be able to take a break…But money is the 
problem. Because just when I thought I was 
able to afford to bring in a new staff member, I 
lost four kids off my roster. So, it's just hard, like 
getting the staff and when things is sometimes 
not consistent.” – T., 37-year-old GFCC provider 
in Hunts Point, Bronx.
One focus group participant also opined that 
experienced ECE workers got burnt out during 
the pandemic and have pivoted to working in 
other industries. 
This combination of issues requires providers to 
regularly confront a time-intensive, costly hiring 
process in a business that is highly dependent 
on reliable staff. While many providers pay for 
upfront training and the background check 
process as incentives to recruit staff, these costs 
add up in a sector with high turnover and low 
business revenue.
5-B. Agency and Bureaucracy 
Engagement
New York City providers engage directly or 
through their family child care network (FCCN) 
with up to two State agencies (OCFS, NYSED) 
and as many as four separate City agencies 
(ACS, DOHMH, HRA, and NYCPS) as well as 
the Mayor’s Office of Child Care and Early 
Childhood Education. Many providers describe 
issues with specific agencies, but also the lack of 
coordination across agencies resulting in slower 
processes and redundancies. These create 
extra work and stress for already overworked 
providers, who often have to submit the same 
paperwork to multiple agencies or spend 
countless hours following up with agencies to 
“I want to bring another staff member. I want to be able to take a break…But money 
is the problem. I want to bring another staff member. I want to be able to take a 
break…But money is the problem.”

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
47
check on the status of issues that disrupt their 
daily operations.
“They [agencies] lack coordination between 
them: you send information via FAM... you go 
to the office and leave hard copies, and not 
even then do they come and inspect, they say 
“you haven´t completed this” so they come and 
give you a violation.” – A., 45-year-old GFCC 
provider in Morrisania, the Bronx.
“They´re always asking me for the same 
document, the same. I go back and I send it, 
send it to the supervisor, upload it to FAM, 
bring it in personally, and like they said, you get 
your receipt and two days later they´re asking 
for it again. I have one [assistant] for 8 months 
and the other for a year and a half and they´re 
not fully approved yet.” – L., 52-year-old GFCC 
provider in Bushwick, Brooklyn.
Unclear Processes and Poor Communication: 
Many providers describe repeatedly and 
fruitlessly submitting the same documentation to 
a specific agency. Online systems like Childcare 
Attendance & Payment System (CAPS) routinely 
crash and do not have basic confirmation 
processes to affirm that submissions were 
received. Few bureaucratic processes they 
engage with have easy-to-find, published 
processing times (i.e. 8-10 business days, or 30 
days) that would offer guidelines to work within. 
Providers report that previously used paper 
applications were actually more effective than 
online tools, because they required agencies 
to have open office hours and staff to process 
applications. 
Prior to the pandemic, providers were able to 
deliver paperwork directly to DOHMH offices 
and speak with staff at that time. Since the 
pandemic, providers report only being allowed 
to submit paperwork to a drop box.
Inadequate Orientation: Despite regular 
engagement with multiple government agencies 
and mandated biannual training, providers are 
overwhelmingly unaware of legal requirements, 
programs, and opportunities that could improve 
their business practices and job quality. They 
do not appear to be receiving adequate 
information from specific agencies, nor have 
City and State agencies worked together to 
consolidate this information and translate it in 
relevant languages. 
There is no live orientation (only an 
asynchronous online orientation) where 
providers can engage with OCFS or DOHMH 
staff in real time when they start their businesses. 
Since they are not clear about regulations and 
systems upfront, providers regularly experience 
delays and unnecessary stress in opening 
or managing their businesses. Numerous 
providers have encountered penalties for not 
having adequate workers’ compensation and 
unemployment or other insurance, and would 
have benefitted from clearly stated requirements 
in an orientation or application process. They 
also report having a hard time obtaining 
information or responses from UFT, which is 
funded by OCFS to help providers navigate 
these processes. 
DOHMH Inspections: DOHMH conducts 
quarterly, unannounced inspections of FCCs 
“They [agencies] lack coordination between them: you send information via FAM... you 
go to the office and leave hard copies, and not even then do they come and inspect, 
they say ‘you haven´t completed this’ so they come and give you a violation.”

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
48
and GFCCs to make sure they are complying 
with OCFS regulations. Providers report that 
lack of clarity on regulations and inspectors’ 
inconsistent interpretation of them is stress-
inducing. So are inspections that disrupt 
children’s schedules and routines. They 
believe a lack of a grievance process and 
professional code of conduct for inspectors 
results in unnecessarily punitive encounters and 
undermines health and safety goals. 
DOHMH staff acknowledge that it is challenging 
to strike a balance between providing technical 
assistance and enforcing regulations. Best 
government practices require them to keep an 
arms-length relationship with providers. On the 
other hand, DOHMH inspectors are the only 
government agency staff that providers, who 
are isolated and overwhelmed, ever connect 
with on-site. And while OCFS has oversight 
of the regulations and training process for 
inspectors, DOHMH staff are on the front lines of 
enforcement. This makes it difficult for DOHMH 
to amend the process to improve the experience 
for providers or DOHMH staff. 
“Sometimes he [the inspector] came at 1:00 in 
the afternoon when the kids were all asleep...
he'll just keep pressing, pressing, pressing, and 
knocking on the door frantically. I opened the 
door to let him in. All my kids woke up and 
started crying…I've asked this question before: 
‘Can you come earlier or later?’...He’d say ...’We 
are required to come anytime, anywhere.’ I think 
this isn't reasonable.” – X., 30-year-old GFCC 
provider in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
Many providers have received violations as a 
result of unclear regulations or inconsistent 
interpretation by inspectors of the regulations. 
They also find that the current policy of keeping 
violations published on the DOHMH website 
for six years negatively impacts their ability to 
recruit clients or build trust with parents. In the 
recent past, violations were only published for 
two years, which they feel is more appropriate, 
particularly for non-emergency violations. 
“If you have something wrong somewhere, 
you'll have a six-year violation! Parents these 
Figure 27
Providers experience with late and non payment
Percent of survey participants who had direct experience
Never
Sometimes
Often
Pays late
Parent
ACS
CACFP
HRA
NYCPS
No payment
Parent
ACS
HRA
NYCPS
CACFP
32%
42%
26%
42%
34%
24%
48%
34%
16%
62%
18%
18%
66%
18%
16%
42%
44%
14%
74%
14%
12%
78%
10%
12%
78%
8%
12%
82%
8%
10%
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
49
days will check online to see if your center is 
good. Is your family day care a good one? What 
happens when you have a ton of violations?... 
One time I had a violation. Do you know why? 
The doctor forgot [to] write down a dose he 
administered. They wrote it as a violation.” – W., 
49-year-old GFCC provider in Flushing, Queens.
5-C. Late and Non-payment
Providers regularly encounter late and non-
payment from both private clients and public 
agencies. (See Figure 27.) It’s standard practice 
to charge private clients at the beginning of 
the enrollment period to prevent late and non-
payment. Nevertheless, over 40 percent of 
providers reported occasions of late and non-
payment from parents. Meanwhile, government 
agencies tend to reimburse providers after 
services have been rendered, either on a bi-
monthly or monthly basis. The reimbursement 
policy presents a persistent cashflow problem 
for providers who are already severely financially 
constrained. 
(See Figure 28.) They result in interest on loans 
and credit card debt, late payment to staff 
and lower take home pay, and instabilities in 
housing, and utility service disruption. 
Agency late and non-payment adds additional, 
unnecessary stress to the parent-provider 
relationship and threatens program enrollment. 
Impact of late or non payment on providers
Percent of survey participants who had direct experience
10
20
30
40%
Rely on credit cards or
loans
Bill late fees
Unable to pay self
Delay staff payment
Eviction threat/notice
Unable to purchase
supplies
Lost services
Lost staff
Lost housing
All
FCC
GFCC
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Figure 28

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
50
When agency systems fail and processes to 
remedy the problem are not clear or accessible, 
providers have no other choice but to look to 
the parent for support – knowing that by virtue 
of being eligible for the CCAP voucher, the 
parent is also financially constrained. 
“The child started my program in September…
and I did not get paid for the child until 
February…I said to the parent, ‘you know, 
they're not paying me. Could you pay me?’ 
And I kid you not, the parent paid for two 
weeks and stopped, right? And I'm like, okay, 
do I expel this child? Do I give up the space?” 
– S., 41-year-old GFCC provider in Flatbush/
Midwood, Brooklyn.
Systemic Challenges:
Additional bureaucratic and technological 
barriers exacerbate late payment. 
Reimbursement policy for agency payments: 
CCDF rules now require states to switch to 
prospective payment for federally funded CCAP 
vouchers, which New York State will comply with 
by August 1, 2026. Feedback from providers 
suggests that prospective payment should be 
instituted across all agencies. 
Childcare Attendance & Payment System 
(CAPS) system problems: Providers report 
significant technical issues with ACS’s CAPS, 
where providers must log attendance as a 
condition for CCAP voucher reimbursement. 
CAPS regularly crashes, particularly when the 
attendance submission deadline approaches, 
which can lead to payment delays. Delays 
between a child being enrolled and added 
to CAPS for attendance tracking are also a 
headache for providers. Adding attendance 
for children added to CAPS after their CCAP 
voucher start date is overly complex. And 
families are sometimes mistakenly dropped from 
the system without notice or warning. 
Enrollment-based payment, starting on August 
1, 2026, will eliminate the need for providers to 
log attendance as they have been, but CAPS or 
another similar online portal will still be required. 
Therefore, a plan to resolve these issues should 
be developed and tested alongside improving 
or changing CAPS to comply with CCDF rules. 
“You guys aren't paying her for those two weeks 
until the voucher gets approved. They're like, 
‘oh, but it'll be fine though, do the Retropay.’ 
And that didn't happen with one of the children. 
They put a different start date, even though 
on the paperwork she put the start date when 
the child started. They didn't pay me from that 
date. They paid me from when the voucher was 
approved.” – K., 45-year-old FCC provider in 
Mott Haven, Bronx.
NYCPS payment delays: Contracts require 
FCCNs to pay providers every two weeks, 
but this is not necessarily being practiced, 
despite the fact that FCCNs have access to 
the Returnable Grant Fund (RGF) program that 
offers interest-free loans in the event of late 
payments from City agencies. 
“DOE has terrible delays with payment ...the 
first year was just awful. Like we were not paid 
for two months at all. And that was like $60,000 
of, you know, investments and things that just 
I had to like, cover. And they didn't prepare 
me for it. They didn't tell me about it. It was 
like it was such a degrading experience.” – S., 
36-year-old provider in Flatbush/Midwood, 
Brooklyn.
“There are [FCCN] agencies that close and 
they leave you hanging, owing you money…It 
happened to me with an agency: it closed and 
didn't pay over 7 months to several providers.” 
– O., 33-year-old GFCC provider in Concourse/
Highbridge, Bronx.

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
51
5-D. Parent Dynamics
Personal Strategies
Providers expressed a strong bond with the 
parents and children they serve. Because 
they invite parents into their homes, their 
relationship becomes more intimate and lacks 
the professional boundaries of a center-based 
program in a commercial location. Many 
providers play a mentorship role with parents 
younger than they are. This bond is largely 
viewed as positive, but it also opens providers 
up to being more vulnerable or susceptible to 
being exploited. 
“You're dealing with younger parents. A lot of 
times because they've just had these children, 
so they usually have less cash saved.” – A., 
36-year-old GFCC provider in Bushwick, 
Brooklyn.
Providers describe some of the unrealistic 
expectations parents put on them and the 
challenges they face. For example, many parents 
ask for support outside of normal business hours 
(holidays, late pick-up, etc.). Parents don´t always 
respect the program’s hours and providers have 
a hard time getting payment for late pickups of 
children. 
“Another problem is also holidays, sometimes 
they work. So sometimes you have to open for 
a kid, because they say “No, I pay for the full 
week and I don´t have someone else”, even if 
they do.” – Y., 49-year-old GFCC provider in 
Throgs Neck, the Bronx.
Parents also can have a hard time paying on 
time. They are often reluctant to commit to a 
fulltime seat and also resist paying for days when 
their child is absent. Providers accommodating 
parents with lower rates or relaxed payment 
periods can be completely stiffed by parents in 
the end. As a result, providers described how 
they establish contracts with parents, including 
clauses that require two weeks’ notice for 
ending or changing services. But if parents do 
not uphold their end of these contracts there is 
no affordable or time-effective way of enforcing 
them. 
Systemic Challenges
Access to CCAP vouchers and NYCPS programs 
makes ECE more affordable to eligible families, 
but the City’s promotion of these programs is 
minimal and applications to access them are 
overly complicated for many parents. While 
providers often help parents to successfully 
navigate these application processes, they 
also experience families losing CCAP voucher 
status, because parents don’t keep up with the 
paperwork needed to maintain it. 
Late and non-payment by parents also points 
to the need for more subsidies of child care 
services for parents not currently accessing 
CCAP vouchers or NYCPS programs. It also 
illustrates how efficient government payment 
systems can alleviate strains between parents 
and providers. If all payments were facilitated by 
government agencies, including collecting cost-
sharing fees from parents, providers wouldn’t 
have to put themselves in the position we’ve just 
described. 
5-E. Small Business or Independent 
Contractor Status
FCCs and GFCCs will likely never have more 
than a few staff. This means that many things 
that make running a small business easier, 
like hiring an accountant or payroll company, 
are costly at such a small scale. Additionally, 
small businesses that have huge fluctuations 
in revenue and staff often find overhead costs, 
like workers compensation insurance, overly 
complicated and burdensome, especially 
because workers compensation insurance 
does not cover the business owner herself. 
If policymakers need FCC providers to use 
more formal business structures, like using 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
52
payroll services to provide staff with W-2s, FCC 
providers need to have stable enrollment to hire 
full-time, permanent staff. 
The biggest challenge of independent 
contractor or small business owner status is 
its impact on the provider’s own wages. Even 
if they do put themselves on their business’s 
monthly payroll, they may forfeit it to prioritize 
other bills. All this poses a unique challenge for 
designing policies to increase their wages and 
benefits – one that would remain even if public 
ECE programming were to move away from the 
voucher model and towards a contract model. 
Many of the recommendations below take this 
challenge into consideration and draw on best 
practices in other fields regarding independent 
contractors and micro-business owners. 
5-F. Inability to Take Time Off
State regulation requires that providers (or a 
staff person who has completed all training and 
background checks) be on-site during open 
business hours. Given high staff turnover and 
long staff application processing times, it is often 
impossible for providers to take time off for 
illness, vacations, or professional development. 
The regulatory logistical challenge makes public 
benefits like paid sick leave an impossibility. To 
take time off, they have to close their business 
for the day. 
Providers describe the emotional turmoil that 
this results in. They feel both trapped and 
isolated. This is exacerbated by the emotional 
distress and anxiety created by work with 
challenging children, unresponsive agencies, 
and unstable enrollment and revenue. 
Given this, it is not surprising that 82 percent of 
providers surveyed expressed interest in using a 
substitute provider pool to help them and their 
staff take time off. New York State is currently 
developing a substitute provider pool, which will 
be housed at participating Child Care Resource 
and Referral (CR&R) organizations.
5-G. Lack of Information about Existing 
Opportunities
Policy advocates, policymakers, and unions 
have worked to achieve policy solutions 
to improve providers' opportunities and 
outcomes. However, our research shows that 
some of those opportunities are underutilized 
or misunderstood. In this section, we explore 
two examples to demonstrate that better 
communication about them is needed.
The CDA and Training Opportunities: The 
child development associate (CDA) certificate 
is a professional development credential that 
can open additional opportunities for providers 
and their staff, particularly if they are interested 
in obtaining a NYCPS contract or transitioning 
to another occupation in the field. Twenty-six 
percent of providers currently have a CDA and 
52 percent expressed interest in obtaining one. 
(See Figure 29.) Many, however, said they lacked 
the money and free time that would require. 
They were unaware of steps that have already 
been taken to make the CDA affordable and 
more accessible.
For example, CUNY currently offers a credit-
bearing CDA certificate online, in both English 
and Spanish, so there is no need for providers 
to travel to class. Additionally, the vast majority 
of providers are eligible for full scholarships 
(except for the cost of books) through the 
Educational Incentive Program (EIP) (Professional 
Development Program 2025). CUNY has also 
invested significant resources in staffing a 
division to assist people who’ve started their 
CDA but not taken the final exam to do so in a 
10-week program that is also available online. 
The same misunderstandings apply to the 15 
hours of annual training required of providers 
and their staff. A common topic in our focus 
groups was the desire for more relevant, 
advanced training and frustration with existing 
trainings. Providers have ideas of trainings they 
want, but do not know how to advocate for 
themselves. 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
53
This suggests that most providers are only 
accessing trainings through the Professional 
Development Program and not exploring other 
extensive options through the Aspire Registry. 
It offers an online library that can be searched 
by topic. Participants are able to share feedback 
in post-training surveys. Providers, who are 
severely financially constrained, tend to opt for 
free trainings, which is a sign that they have not 
been properly informed about the EIP, which 
provides 75-100 percent reimbursement for 
up to $2,500 in training and education costs 
annually. 
Union Benefits: One of the most common job 
quality concerns that providers expressed in 
their surveys and focus groups was access to 
health insurance benefits for themselves and 
their staff. While the majority of providers earn 
so little take home pay that they qualify for 
Medicaid, many are looking for comprehensive 
coverage for themselves, their families, and 
their staff. We found that providers had little 
understanding of benefits available through the 
United Federation of Teachers (UFT). All New 
York City FCC and GFCC providers who are 
enrolled as UFT members (regardless of whether 
or not they are dues-paying members) can 
obtain the following health benefits at no cost:
CDA certificate interest
Currently have CDA
26%
20%
28%
Interested in obtaining a CDA
52%
54%
52%
Obstacle: No time
40%
36%
40%
Obstacle: Travel
26%
18%
28%
Obstacle: Language barriers
16%
18%
16%
All
FCC
GFCC
Number of providers surveyed = 465
Source: CNYCA GFCC/FCC Provider Survey, January - August 2024
Figure 29
• Comprehensive dental coverage and 
vision care (for the provider only).
• Unlimited telemedicine for the provider 
and her family.
• 24/7 mental health helpline.
• A $10,000 life insurance policy.
• Reimbursement for health plan premiums.
• Prescription drug savings. 
Unfortunately, these benefits do not extend to 
FCC and GFCC program staff or their families 
(with the exception of telemedicine access for 
the provider’s family members). 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
54
There is not just one policy that can solve the 
set of challenges our research identifies. In 
this section, we make a direct link between 
key findings in this report and a package of 
policy solutions that can, if comprehensively 
enacted, improve business stability, provider 
and staff wages, and program quality. Many 
of the elements of this policy package have 
already been developed by policy experts and 
advocates in New York.
6-A. A True Cost of Care Method
Throughout this report, we reference the true 
cost of care. According to CCDF rules, states 
have the choice between using a market rate 
or alternative cost-based methodology for 
determining voucher and contract rates. If 
New York State adopted a true cost of care 
methodology, it would stop using the market 
rate methodology to determine CCAP voucher 
rates. Instead, the State would set voucher rates 
based on the actual costs of running an ECE 
program, including adequately compensating 
staff and providers. If adopted, this would 
immediately increase program revenue, staff 
wages, and benefits. This would, in turn, 
improve job quality for existing providers and 
staff thereby increasing program stability. 
For all voucher- and NYCPS-contracted seats, 
providers would be paid a higher rate. This 
would offset low private pay rates that providers 
negotiate with parents not eligible for vouchers. 
However, low private pay rates would still be 
a factor in determining how to allocate total 
revenue. Therefore, while it may improve 
program revenue, the share of total seats paid 
for with vouchers or contracts would determine 
how much of this additional revenue providers 
could dedicate to their own take home pay.
A Five-part Policy Package for Stable, High-Quality Home-based ECE
SECTION 6
Several true cost of care models have already 
been developed for New York State by P5FS 
that could be adopted immediately. They 
include improved compensation and benefits 
for all ECE occupations as well as other non-
personnel costs that are necessary for safe and 
high-quality care. These models are also aligned 
with current State regulations, where weekly 
pay rates, regardless of hours worked, and 
pay differentials based on the child’s age are 
standard. 
Our research finds that providers think a new 
methodology should re-evaluate some of these 
standards. For example, providers discussed 
how pay differentials by age (which have 
grown over time; see Figure 18) are based 
on an assumption that older children are less 
expensive to care for. This does not align with 
some providers’ lived experience. Additionally, 
dynamics with parents regarding hours of 
service are exacerbated by public policy that 
pays providers a weekly rate that does not 
acknowledge the specific hours of service 
provided.11 Many providers believe a true cost 
of care methodology and resulting voucher and 
contract rates should use an hourly, not weekly, 
rate that can more accurately compensate 
providers for their time. 
A true cost of care methodology will include pay 
differentials between center- and home-based 
programs. However, the difference would likely 
be smaller than exists now, given that FCC and 
GFCC providers have higher staffing ratios, 
11 
 CCAP voucher rates are for the week, where a program 
providing a child 50 hours of care receives the same revenue as a 
program providing a child 30 hours of care. Programs do not receive 
additional CCAP revenue unless care in one day exceeds 12 hours per 
day.

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
55
which increases their operating costs, while 
centers may have higher rental costs because 
they rent commercial spaces. The gap in pay 
differentials between center- and home-based 
programs will further shrink if the true cost of 
care methodology includes pay standards by 
occupation. 
“The pay is different. If we were provided with 
the same amount of money as the center, we 
could hire better teachers.” – Y., 50-year-old 
GFCC provider in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn.
It is worth noting that the rates resulting from 
an OCFS true cost of care methodology are 
appropriate for licensed ECE programs, but are 
not sufficient for current NYCPS requirements 
for 3-K and Pre-K. New York City will need to 
develop its own true cost of care methodology 
to take into account additional requirements and 
responsibilities imposed on providers who have 
contracts to provide 3-K. 
“We´re part of a network that works for the 
Department of Education. And because of that, 
we have a lot of added responsibilities…It's a 
lot of lesson plans, observations, everything that 
you would do in a classroom…We also had to 
get extra training. So, I had to get my CDA in 
order to provide that service. So, all of that is 
added responsibility and work, for a group of 
people that already do a lot of work, and same 
pay.” – C., 30-year-old GFCC provider in East 
Tremont/Crotona, the Bronx.
6-B. Universal Child Care
A universal ECE system would further improve 
take home pay and business stability as well as 
eliminate much of the friction between parents, 
providers, and public agencies that currently 
plagues the ECE sector. Many of the providers 
we engaged with believe State or 
City universal child care would best 
address the issues identified in our 
research – particularly the low pay 
and enrollment challenges related 
to a fragmented system where City 
agencies compete to recruit families for public 
programs and private pay families can rarely 
afford the true cost of care. 
A universal public program is defined as one 
that is available to everyone, regardless of 
income level or immigration status. For a 
universal child care program to be effective, 
equitable, and efficient, it must offer parents a 
choice of program types; provide affordable, 
fair, and progressive subsidies or cost-sharing for 
parents; and also pay providers and staff based 
on their hard work and established expertise in 
the field. As the City expands ECE programs 
to more families, it must work carefully at the 
neighborhood level to support established ECE 
businesses before creating additional public 
options that undermine the viability of those 
businesses. It must also prioritize the most 
vulnerable families in these expansion efforts. 
In a universal system, all seats would be 
paid through CCAP vouchers or government 
contracts. Therefore, low private pay rates would 
be eliminated and no longer put downward 
pressure on total revenue and take home pay. 
However, a universal system would only yield 
adequate staff wages and take home pay 
for providers if it utilized a true cost of care 
methodology that adequately compensates staff 
and providers. Without that, implementation 
of a universal ECE system will meet supply 
constraints; there won’t be enough qualified 
ECE staff to make capacity available to more 
families who currently are not utilizing existing 
capacity because they cannot afford to pay 
for it privately. In a universal system utilizing a 
true cost of care methodology with adequate 
compensation, a fully enrolled program would 
have sufficient revenue to guarantee staff wages, 
provider take home pay, and benefits for all 
workers.
“If we were provided with the same amount of 
money as the center, we could hire better teachers.”

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
56
A universal ECE system will require improved 
agency systems to handle more parent 
applications and more payments. Currently 
income-eligible parents who receive CCAP 
vouchers or extended-day Pre-K and 3-K seats 
have their seats fully paid for by the voucher or 
contract, because CCBG funds can be used to 
pay for the seat. Parents who are not income-
eligible but choose extended-day 3-K and Pre-K 
and 3-K are required to pay for the extended-
day portion of care, because the City’s Pre-K and 
3-K programs only cover the school-day care. 
Our assessment of this cost-sharing is that it 
has been a relatively streamlined and simple 
process between the cost-sharers (the parent 
and NYCPS), but that there are significant 
challenges in payment processing from NYCPS 
to ECE programs. For providers, there are 
further payment processing delays because 
their FCCNs also play a role in passing NYCPS 
payments on to them. While there are issues 
with the NYCPS centralized enrollment process 
(see Section 4-B) and significant payment 
processing challenges to overcome, NYCPS 
has established a well-functioning cost-sharing 
model with parents that could easily be 
expanded to universal ECE programming. 
The City and State have maxed out the available 
CCDF funds as a result of expanded eligibility 
and improved voucher rates in recent years. 
That means that additional funds for a universal 
ECE system will most likely come from State and 
City tax revenue that will not necessarily require 
the extensive reporting requirements federal 
grants do. This is a policy design opportunity. 
The City will need to convene all agencies 
and key stakeholders, including parents and 
representatives from centers, FCCs, and GFCCs 
to determine the best cost-sharing model that 
can facilitate fair access to ECE programs and 
reduce the paperwork burden on all parties in 
order to expedite enrollment. 
For example, if a universal ECE system required 
families earning above 85 percent of State 
Median Income (SMI) to pay seven percent of 
their income on ECE (a standard suggested 
by the Biden-Harris administration), the City 
would need to review tax returns of all families 
and determine a unique price for each. On the 
other hand, if parents earning above 85 percent 
of SMI were required to pay $100 per week, 
parents could immediately sign up and receive 
this service. Lengthy applications would only 
be required for parents who are eligible for full 
coverage according to New York State’s current 
law.12 This is just one example of a trade-off that 
will need to be evaluated with key stakeholders 
as a universal ECE system is designed. 
6-C. A Sector-wide Career Ladder
A career ladder that incentivizes people to join 
the ECE workforce and grow their expertise 
through education and experience in the field 
is essential for the labor-intensive ECE sector to 
meet parent demand.
There is currently an ECE staffing crisis in New 
York State across all program modalities (Empire 
State Campaign for Child Care 2025). This 
often results in existing ECE programs being 
unable to make available their full capacity, 
because they cannot meet sufficient staffing 
ratios. High turnover compromises the ability of 
programs to establish long-term relationships 
with children, which is critical for early childhood 
development. As our research demonstrates, 
low compensation and poor benefits contribute 
to high turnover at FCCs and GFCCs. Given 
the low wages in the field, the approval process 
and unpaid training hours further disincentivize 
people who want to work in ECE. For assistant 
teachers, they can make comparable wages in 
retail or fast food where there is minimal time 
between their hiring and start date and no 
upfront, unpaid training required. 
12 
 85 percent of State Median Income (SMI) is currently the 
income threshold for a CCAP voucher eligibility in New York State. In 
2025, 85 percent SMI is $77,226 for a 2-person family and $95,397 for 
a 3-person family. For households earning $1 more than the current 
CCAP voucher threshold, a $100 weekly copay to access full-time child 
care would be approximately 6.7 percent of the 2-person family’s annual 
income and 5.5 percent of the 3-person family’s income.

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
57
These challenges extend throughout the 
ECE workforce at all occupations. Successful 
organizing and union bargaining, with the 
support of Mayor Bill de Blasio and the City 
Council, resulted in a budget agreement in 
2019 to bring center-based Pre-K teachers’ 
salaries to parity with starting salaries for 
public Pre-K teachers (Parrott 2019). However, 
that agreement excluded FCC and GFCC 
providers, and significant disparities exist in 
pay and benefits between FCC and GFCC 
staff, center-based staff, and public school 
staff with the same titles and responsibilities. 
This is directly linked to the fact that different 
contract rates and CCAP voucher rates exist, 
comparing centers and home-based programs, 
and different unions exist in the public schools 
and private sector. Together, these institutional 
arrangements create budget constraints that 
result in pay differentials and quality differences 
across modalities, as well as high turnover from 
one modality to another. 
For example, NYCPS must pay public ECE 
staff according to the UFT contract for K-12 
educators, which includes generous benefits 
and a career ladder that incentivizes obtaining 
additional education and experience. Center- 
and home-based programs offering Pre-K 
and 3-K through contracts with NYCPS do 
not include the UFT’s K-12 educator career 
ladder and public benefits packages. The same 
issue arises with other occupations in the ECE 
sector. There are no built-in voucher or contract 
increases that acknowledge additional education 
obtained by FCC and GFCC providers, which 
may disincentivize providers from obtaining 
additional credentials. Due to low revenue, the 
standard has been to pay assistant teachers 
the city minimum wage. However, centers who 
contract with the City and are covered under the 
2024 agreement between the City and District 
Council 37, Local 205, the Day Care Council of 
New York now pay assistant teachers $18 per 
hour with a cost of living adjustment of three 
percent annually through 2025 (District Council 
37 2024). City contract amounts have been 
amended to reflect this change. As soon as ECE 
staff earn necessary experience or credentials, 
they often leave from one program modality to 
another because of the opportunity for better 
compensation and benefits. 
What is needed, then, is not simply a minimum 
standard for compensation in the ECE 
sector, but a career ladder that guarantees 
compensation for similar work across all program 
modalities and incentivizes people to grow 
professionally either in their existing role or on 
a pathway to a different occupation within the 
field. Such a career ladder can bring new people 
into the ECE workforce, reduce the drop-off of 
existing ECE staff and providers, and remove 
pay disparity as the cause of turnover and 
quality difference across modalities. 
In 2023, a group of policy experts, led by CUNY 
PDI and Jenn O'Connor, principal at Jenn 
O'Connor Consulting, LLC, began convening to 
develop an ECE sector salary scale to address 
these challenges. The group has developed a 
“career lattice,” connected with predictable 
increases in compensation to ensure ECE 
workforce retention through fair compensation.13 
It takes into consideration the current credential 
requirements of various New York State and City 
ECE program types (OCFS-regulated programs, 
as well as 3K and Pre-K) and builds in raises 
based on years of experience and additional 
responsibilities of particular occupations. For the 
purposes of FCC and GFCC providers, it puts 
them on the same ladder as center directors 
given similar responsibilities, but recognizes that 
directors are currently required to have a higher 
level of education to start. 
If a career ladder that builds in recognition for 
responsibilities, educational credentials, and 
years of experience were implemented, it would 
provide clarity for current and prospective ECE 
13 
 A career lattice is different than a ladder, where a person 
enters a profession and moves along each rung of one ladder. The lattice 
reflects the flexibility with which the ECE workforce enters the field, 
moving across multiple roles (i.e. from assistant to teacher to director, or 
from provider to teacher), earning credentials along the way.

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
58
staff and providers and an understanding that 
the field includes professional development 
opportunities, not just low-wage jobs. However, 
it would also result in a level of complexity for 
contract and voucher rates and would require 
more public infrastructure. 
For example, rather than having one CCAP 
voucher rate for a particular age group or one 
contract rate for all FCCN-affiliated programs 
offering 3-K, rates would need to be uniquely 
modified for all programs to reflect the 
credentials and experience of their existing 
staff. A career ladder that did not have voucher 
and contract rate differences and a system to 
facilitate it would put extra financial pressure on 
FCC and GFCC providers’ take home pay. They 
would now be expected to pay staff according 
to credentials and experience, but those raises 
would likely come out of the revenue set aside 
for their own take home pay. 
There would also need to be a public system 
that tracks and verifies the credentials and 
experience of all ECE staff and providers, so that 
rates of pay could easily be calculated. Such a 
system already exists in the Aspire Registry, but 
it is currently voluntary. Public investment would 
be needed to expand the Aspire Registry and 
support and incentivize ECE programs to use 
it. Without such a system, it would be hard to 
implement new voucher rates that reflect staff 
and provider credentials and experience. 
6-D. Public Marketing Campaign for All 
ECE Programs
New York City’s universal Pre-K and 3-K 
programs have become a national model for 
how cities can quickly build high-quality ECE 
programs to make a sizable dent in one of the 
biggest contributors to the affordability crisis 
in the U.S. today. However, investment in Pre-K 
and 3-K and the City’s exceptional promotion 
of these programs did not result in increased 
utilization of FCCs and GFCCs. In fact, FCC and 
GFCC programs have seen declining enrollment 
since the launch of these programs even when 
they are contracted to provide 3-K to the public. 
The launch of a universal ECE system, then, 
is not sufficient to address the enrollment 
challenges that drive business instability and low 
take home pay for FCCs and GFCCs. In fact, if 
the City or State builds a universal ECE system 
by expanding NYCPS-designed programs, 
providers will experience further enrollment 
decline. This is because current programs 
administered by NYCPS utilize centralized 
enrollment and FCCNs to mediate relationships 
between providers and the agency, which has 
resulted in a plethora of problems for providers. 
If FCCNs continue to play a mediating role in a 
universal ECE system, that system will only be 
accessible to FCC and GFCC programs that are 
FCCN members.
An additional hurdle is the preference for age-
based classrooms over mixed-age environments. 
Because Pre-K and 3-K have been heavily 
promoted in recent years, many parents are 
not aware of licensed center- and home-based 
programs that serve all ages, or that there 
are CCAP vouchers to subsidize the cost of 
those programs. As a result, the City needs to 
engage in a robust public education campaign 
to increase the visibility of center- and home-
based programs that don’t fit the 3-K or Pre-K 
mold. Such a campaign should utilize a term 
like “early care and education” to describe all 
ECE programs and clarify that 3-K and Pre-K 
programs are part of a broader ECE sector. It 
should educate parents about the unique added 
values of FCCs and GFCCs, such as mixed-age 
learning, that have become overshadowed 
by the launch of universal Pre-K and 3-K. (See 
Section 1.) Highlighting these benefits would 
mitigate the unintended effects of 3-K and 
Pre-K public education campaigns on parent 
education and public awareness.
It is critical that this rebranding happen before 
a universal ECE system is in place, because it 
will immediately improve enrollment at FCCs 
and GFCCs. If all FCCs and GFCCs had good 
enrollment, take home pay would increase 
threefold. (See Figure 23.) 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
59
Furthermore, educating parents about the 
variety of ECE options available to them will 
expand the public’s imagination of what a 
universal ECE system should be and make sure 
that it is designed with parents’ preferences in 
mind. 
One of the challenges with a rebranding 
effort is that ECE programs today are tied to 
different funding streams or agencies that 
require different application processes. Families 
looking to access 3-K and Pre-K are invited to 
do so during a centralized enrollment process 
with an annual spring deadline. Parents eligible 
for CCAP vouchers either learn about the 
application from an ECE program directly or 
a City system, like 311 or the MyCity.nyc.gov 
website. Application processes outside of those 
public programs are specific to each individual 
center- or home-based program, where word 
of mouth is the predominant form of public 
education and promotion. 
In a universal system, all of this can be 
streamlined so that there is one starting 
application (even if some parents will be 
required to submit more documentation so 
that CCBG funds can be used to pay for their 
family’s seats). In the meantime, a rebrand 
of public programs should coincide with 
agencies streamlining the public-facing part of 
the application process as much as possible. 
Common terms should be adopted across 
agency programs and with the user (parent) 
experience in mind. For example, parents do not 
need to know the terms CCAP, CCBG, “legally 
exempt,” or even the distinction between FCCs 
and GFCCs. Instead, agencies should work 
with marketing experts to develop consistent 
language that educates parents and breaks 
down silos. 
6-E. A Wage Subsidy Fund
Even in a universal system, with a public 
promotion campaign that educates parents 
about all of the available ECE program options, 
there’s no guarantee that all seats will be utilized 
in all ECE programs. This will affect total revenue 
at all ECE programs and take home pay for 
FCC and GFCC providers. Some programs will 
innovate to address budget shortfalls, while 
others will decide to close their doors. 
However, if ECE programs face budget 
shortfalls, they will impact the business and 
its longevity, not the worker. Employees of 
center- and home-based programs will continue 
to receive their salaries and benefits despite 
these firm-level budgetary challenges, though 
at some point – if an ECE program does have 
to make some cuts – those employees may 
get laid off and be eligible for unemployment 
insurance as they look for other work. These 
are the kinds of protections New York State 
has in place for employees, but that do not 
extend to independent contractors or small 
business owners. FCCs and GFCCs who face 
low and fluctuating enrollment, even in a 
universal system with a robust public promotion 
campaign, will continue to do what they always 
do – subsidize the operations of their businesses 
out of the provider’s take home pay. It is for 
this reason that the ECE system, even in its 
most expansive form financed by public dollars, 
will always need some sort of wage subsidy 
program. 
Such a policy has been proposed in multiple 
years of State budget negotiations, to prevent 
ECE workers from leaving their jobs due to 
current low wages in the sector. Current policy 
discussions include providing an emergency 
wage subsidy of $12,500 to all ECE staff and 
providers. In the case of the median FCC or 
GFCC providers, a $12,500 wage subsidy 
would increase their annual take home pay to 
$27,985 or $10.86 per hour. This is still below 
the minimum wage but is an urgently needed 80 
percent increase from their current hourly take 
home pay of $6.01.
In the current ECE system, with a mix of public 
and private payers, the State or City would 
need a fund that could be used to fill the gap 
between current salaries and any minimum 
wage standards established through collective 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
60
bargaining or in a sector-wide career ladder. 
For example, assistants at centers currently 
earn $18 per hour in New York City. If the 
State or City determined that this should be 
the minimum standard for ECE assistants, the 
government could provide a wage subsidy to 
home-based providers so that they can also pay 
their assistants $18 per hour. In order for a wage 
subsidy to be a useful tool, the State or City will 
need to improve systems like the Aspire Registry 
for tracking the workforce and their appropriate 
compensation level. (See Section 6-C.) 
In a universal ECE system paying the true cost 
of care that includes a sector-wide career ladder, 
wage subsidies will eventually not be needed 
for ECE employees. But they will still be needed 
for FCC and GFCC providers. They provide 
protection against self-exploitation that other 
employees (in the ECE sector and throughout 
the U.S. economy) receive through their wage 
contracts. 
Wage subsidies are a policy tool often used 
to incentivize companies to hire the long-term 
unemployed or other marginalized workers. 
For example, New York City currently offers 
the Employer Incentive Plus program, where 
businesses can receive a wage subsidy of 
up to 60 percent of an employee’s monthly 
salary if the employee is a public assistance 
recipient. New York State also offers the Work 
Opportunity Tax Credit, which reimburses 
employers through a federal tax credit for hiring 
people from a wide range of disadvantaged 
groups. The Summer Youth Employment 
Program (SYEP) can also be thought of as a 
wage subsidy program. With SYEP, the City 
pays the full wage for participating youth to 
work at non-profits, government agencies, or 
small businesses for the summer. One expected 
outcome is that youth will be permanently hired 
by their employer after the program is over. In 
all of these examples, the wage subsidy is a 
temporary financial incentive for employers to 
take a chance on a person they may not have 
otherwise hired. 
In the context of the ECE system, use of a 
wage subsidy would be slightly different. 
Here, the goal is to make sure that minimum 
wage standards are met in order to reduce 
staff turnover, sustain and grow ECE capacity, 
and increase program quality. However, the 
existence of wage subsidy programs in current 
City and State programs is evidence that the 
City and State have established expertise with 
setting them up, either directly to businesses, 
directly to employees, or through tax credits. 
Such a program is a necessity for the stability of 
the ECE sector to fill the current gap while all of 
the other long-term policy solutions described 
above are being developed, legislated, and 
implemented over time. 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
61
“The only time we hear about anybody is when 
they want their name on a ballot, or it's time 
to physically vote. They send a thousand of the 
same fliers during the week. I don't know you. 
I've never seen you in my community before. 
But you say, ‘oh, we're going to do this for child 
care workers.’ Then you get into office and who 
am I? You said you was going to help do this for 
me. And now that I helped vote you in. I'm just 
mud.” – K., 45-year-old FCC provider in Mott 
Haven, the Bronx.
The five-part policy package described in 
Section 6 is necessary for expanding public 
ECE programming by guaranteeing there is a 
stable, high-quality ECE sector to support those 
programs. This comprehensive policy package 
will take significant resources and time to 
implement well.
This section outlines policy values and 
recommendations that can also more 
immediately address some of the acute 
problems experienced by FCC and GFCC 
providers. They will be necessary steps towards 
a comprehensive policy solution, which must be 
built on top of the existing system and which 
is informed by federal funding that has specific 
guidelines. 
7-A. Values
Our research identified some values that 
emerged frequently, regardless of the topic or 
the agency. These values should be integrated 
into all policy responses:
1. New systems should be built with 
meaningful FCC and GFCC provider input. 
Providers are the experts in this sector and 
Recommendations 
SECTION 7
should be the primary point of reference for 
the development of new agency systems 
used to manage the ECE sector. In many 
instances, systems have been launched 
without sufficient user testing, resulting in 
costly, unusable experiences for providers 
and families. Any new system – from a paper 
application to a complex online marketplace 
– should be designed for the holistic 
needs of FCCs and GFCCs. This requires 
testing new systems with multiple providers 
at multiple stages of development and 
incorporating their feedback before systems 
are publicly launched. 
2. Language justice. Some 62 percent of 
providers we surveyed identify as Spanish 
speakers. Seventeen percent speak 
languages other than English or Spanish. All 
agencies engaging with providers should 
provide translations of all regulations, 
resource guides, and correspondence 
with providers in multiple languages. We 
recommend these agencies adopt the 
practices of NYCPS’s Office of Language 
Access, which provides translations in the 
nine most common languages spoken in the 
city. While some agencies report currently 
using Language Line, they must improve 
their communication with providers about its 
availability. 
3. Agencies should be adequately staffed to 
provide human technical assistance and 
support. While technology has improved 
application processing, it cannot replace the 
important role of trained and empowered 
agency staff. All agency processes and 
systems should clearly publicize how 
providers can contact relevant agency staff 
and hold open office hours where providers 
can work with trained agency staff who can 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
62
provide general guidance and technical 
support. 
4. Agencies will need to work together and 
in collaboration with the NYC CCR&R 
to improve the system. ECE policy 
improvements are challenged by the number 
of federal, State and City agencies that make 
the system function. Many of these agencies 
are constrained by federal Child Care and 
Development Fund (CCDF) rules and State 
Office of Children and Family Services 
(OCFS) regulations. Furthermore, OCFS 
has historically funded the NYC CCR&R 
and UFT to provide support to providers in 
New York City. To increase the efficiency of 
scarce resources and streamline support to 
providers, these community and member 
organizations must be better integrated as 
thought partners into system improvements. 
While we’ve identified which agency has 
the authority to act on specific policy 
recommendations below, we understand that 
how agencies interact is much more complex 
than we may understand. We encourage 
agency staff to work together to find address 
the issues and recommendations described 
here.
7-B. Policy Recommendations 
1. Guarantee that voucher and contract 
rates include take home pay and 
benefits for FCC and GFCC providers 
commensurate with experience, 
credentials and working hours.
• New York State should implement a true 
cost of care methodology for Child Care 
Assistance Program (CCAP) voucher 
payments. It should include a career ladder, 
so that take home pay for providers and 
wages for staff are commensurate with 
experience, credentials, and working hours. 
This alternative cost-based methodology 
should include health insurance costs for 
providers and their staff as well as necessary 
insurance policies (and funding to utilize 
substitute providers) so that providers and 
staff can participate in the State’s Paid Family 
Leave program and the City’s Paid Safe and 
Sick Leave program. 
• New York State should establish a wage 
subsidy program to compensate providers 
and staff whose take home pay or wages 
fall below a minimum standard. This can 
be achieved by passing the Statewide 
Childcare Workforce Living Wage Fund 
bill (A.492A (Hevesi)/S.5533 (Brisport)), 
which would establish a wage subsidy fund 
and mechanism for compensating providers 
and staff to fill the gap between current 
compensation and an established career 
ladder for the sector. 
• NYCPS should use a true cost of care 
method for its next five-year contract 
with Family Child Care Networks (FCCNs) 
to deliver programs such as 3-K. In 
addition to meeting minimum health and 
safety standards, these multi-year contracts 
should incorporate the costs of increased 
educational requirements on providers and/
or staff, an annual cost-of-living adjustment 
(COLA), pay differentials for those providing 
extended day care, and funds for providers 
to take paid vacation, in addition to current 
holiday and professional development days 
outlined in the contract. These contracts 
should also offer providers access to the 
same benefits as NYCPS teachers, either by 
enrolling providers directly in those benefits 
programs or incorporating the cost of similar 
quality benefits into the contract rate. 
“I think they could give us the same amount of 
vacation time as the Center. They could do it, 
it's just that they don't want to. So that's exactly 
what I'm talking about: it's unfair. We're at the 
bottom. We work the hardest, earn the least, 
and yet we don't even have vacations.” -Yl., 
50-year-old GFCC provider in Sheepshead Bay, 
Brooklyn.

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
63
2. Establish affordable, accessible benefits 
and protections for childcare programs, 
providers and their staff to access.
• New York State should conduct a 
feasibility study of the best mechanism for 
providing a high-quality, comprehensive 
healthcare insurance program, including 
dental and vision, for providers and 
their staff. Given the benefits cliff many 
providers and staff face as a result of 
improving compensation in the field as well 
as drastic federal funding cuts to Medicaid, 
the State should investigate all options and 
identify those that offer the best quality, 
cost effectiveness, and administrative ease. 
This could include: developing a subsidized 
State insurance plan for care workers 
specifically; expanding the vision insurance, 
dental insurance, and wellness offerings of 
the UFT and CSEA; and enrolling providers 
and their staff directly into programs 
serving public employees. Proposals 
investigated in the feasibility study should 
take into consideration the unique needs of 
providers, such as their employment status 
as independent contractors or small business 
owners, the reality that their take home pay is 
highly sensitive to enrollment, the prominent 
role of immigrants in the ECE workforce, and 
the need for simple application processes.
• New York State and New York City should 
amend their laws to include FCC and 
GFCC providers in the existing public 
pension programs. See Appendix C for 
more details.
• New York State should establish an 
Unemployment Bridge program that 
provides unemployment compensation to 
workers who are excluded from regular 
unemployment insurance because of 
their immigration status or the work they 
do. This can be achieved by passing the 
Unemployment Bridge Program bill (A.3582 
(Reyes)/S.173(Ramos).
3. Create a one-stop shop for all early 
care and education options that can 
immediately connect families and 
providers and facilitate planning for 
future City policies and programs. 
• The Mayor’s Office should replace 
or improve current City websites, 
like MyCity.nyc.gov, with an online 
marketplace to house all information 
about childcare supply and options for 
families. An improved marketplace will 
increase public awareness about current ECE 
options and help the City and advocates 
understand where (by neighborhood or 
program modality) there is a supply and 
demand mismatch. The portal should 
educate the public about program 
modalities (home-based, center-based) and 
program types (full-day child care, Pre-K 
programming) and their unique values. It 
should include a robust search function 
that enables the public to search by key 
criteria and view results on a map. The portal 
must create a simple mechanism for ECE 
programs to update availability that does 
not create a barrier to entry. It should easily 
connect families to application processes 
for subsidized care (such as CCAP vouchers 
or NYCPS programs). Everything should 
be designed mobile-first, with language 
access prioritized. The technology that 
undergirds the portal should be owned by 
the City of New York and developed with 
trusted technologists and experts in the field, 
including FamTech companies like Wiggle 
Room.
• The Mayor’s Office should develop a 
new marketing campaign to educate 
the public about all ECE programs 
simultaneously and options for families 
to affordably access those programs. A 
citywide marketing campaign that highlights 
the unique qualities of FCCs and GFCCs 
and their benefits for child development can 
improve the conversation about parents’ 
needs, help to broaden the conversation 
about the design of expanded ECE 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
64
programming, and improve FCC and GFCC 
providers’ ability to recruit new clients. 
Integrating a quality rating and improvement 
system (QRIS), such as Quality Stars NY, into 
this marketing campaign and the related 
online marketplace (see above) can also 
improve matchmaking between parents and 
ECE programs.
• The Mayor’s Office should work with 
OCFS, City agencies, and the NYC CCR&R 
to develop a clear, simple application 
process for parents and providers to 
directly enroll children in a specific child 
care program of the parent’s choosing. 
The current process to access subsidized 
care (either the CCAP voucher or NYCPS 
programs) is confusing, with different 
enrollment periods and application 
processes. CCBG-funded seats in both the 
programs also include the CCAP eligibility 
application, which is designed by OCFS. 
FCCNs add a further layer of complication 
to the NYCPS program enrollment process. 
All agencies and the NYC CCR&R who play a 
role in this process should work together to 
create a clear and simple application process 
(as well as propose regulatory changes to 
further improve the process). It must be easy 
to explain to parents in a new marketing 
campaign. It must facilitate a streamlined 
process between agencies to more quickly 
process applications for parents. It must 
offer a path for FCC and GFCC providers to 
directly enroll children in their programs and 
follow up on the status of those applications. 
Lastly, it must facilitate coordination among 
agencies, programs, FCCNs, and the NYC 
CCR&R about where excess supply is 
available. 
• The Mayor’s Office should submit an 
annual report to the City Council that 
evaluates capacity and utilization across 
private and public ECE programs. The 
City Council should hold an annual public 
hearing about the report findings. With 
multiple agencies and community-based 
organizations connecting parents and 
providers, it is challenging to assess where 
there are gaps and inefficiencies. Without 
this knowledge, public programs cannot be 
expanded in ways that prioritize vulnerable 
families and established ECE programs. 
The Mayor’s Office is in a unique position 
to synthesize information about capacity by 
neighborhood and demographic groups, 
and OCFS could be a partner in providing 
utilization data. This analysis should be 
prepared annually to aid the Mayor and 
City Council in legislative and budget 
priorities. Establishing a public hearing will 
also create an effective space for providers, 
ECE program staff, parents, and other 
stakeholders to share their perspectives 
regarding a complex ECE system.
• New York City should commit to using 
City revenue to guarantee that existing 
subsidized ECE program options are 
accessible to all families regardless of 
whether CCBG funds adequately cover 
program costs. Families in New York City 
are confused about what child care support 
is actually available, because of messaging 
in recent years on 3-K budget cuts and 
voucher waitlists. This constrains families' 
decisions about where to live and providers' 
business decisions. Agencies have also 
slowed application processing times due to 
concerns about funding. Committing City 
revenue to cover the costs of fully funding 
these programs will reduce confusion and 
disruptions in child care access. 
4. Remove bureaucratic barriers that 
result in revenue loss or cash flow 
problems for FCCs and GFCCs.
• New York State should automatically 
provide CCAP voucher rate increases 
to providers. This can be achieved by 
passing the Automatic Rate Increases for 
Child Care Providers bill (A.1001A (Clark)/
S.4472A (Ramos)). CNYCA’s survey results 
reveal that only 30 percent of providers 
received the maximum CCAP rate in 2023 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
65
because, under current law, each program 
must affirm that their private pay rates are 
equal to, or exceed, the current maximum 
CCAP rate. This disproportionately affects 
providers serving low-income families who 
cannot afford the maximum CCAP rate. 
Notably, federal CCDF rules promulgated 
in 2024 clarify that states “are allowed and 
encouraged to pay child care providers the 
full established payment rate, even if it is 
higher than the price the provider charges 
privately paying families.” 
• OCFS should implement new federal 
guidelines to pay CCAP vouchers to 
child care programs at the beginning 
of the month and based on enrollment. 
OCFS submitted a waiver to the federal 
government to delay implementing these 
new guidelines until August 1, 2026. OCFS 
should work proactively this year to develop 
and test new systems required for this 
transition, so it can be implemented quickly 
across the state. 
• NYCPS should change its payment 
processing for all ECE programming to 
pay programs at the beginning of the 
month and based on enrollment. New 
federal guidelines only apply to federally 
funded seats. However, the majority of 3-K 
and Pre-K contracted seats are not federally 
funded. These best practices should be 
applied across the board.
• ACS should further develop and 
implement a transparent recoupment 
policy that minimizes the impact of 
City administrative errors on providers’ 
cash flow. ACS has begun implementing 
such a process, but it has not been clearly 
communicated to all providers. Recoupment 
of funds is most common when a provider 
is caring for a child that has transferred from 
one program to another but the parent 
hasn’t taken the proper steps to transfer 
the voucher. The recoupment policy should 
include standards for notifying providers 
if a payment error has been identified and 
giving providers a reasonable time and 
process to refute the declaration. If the error 
is substantiated, providers should be given 
payment plan options rather than the agency 
clawing back all funds without notice, which 
providers report has had detrimental effects 
on their businesses.
• ACS should overhaul the Childcare 
Attendance & Payment System (CAPS) 
system (or replace it with a better-
functioning system) so that providers 
can enter enrollment and attendance to 
be paid accurately and on time. Section 
5-C outlines significant technical issues 
with CAPS. There are also many features 
that could be built into the system that 
would resolve multiple issues with accurate 
reporting. These challenges must be 
addressed, and anticipated challenges with 
CCDF rule changes (prospective, enrollment-
based payments) should be addressed in an 
overhaul of CAPS. CAPS should be properly 
designed and supported to accommodate 
user needs during surge periods (like 
submission deadlines). It should incorporate 
design and technology that can minimize 
errors and posting delays that necessitate 
adjustments. Lastly, it should incorporate 
built-in notifications and customer service 
support to providers concerning changes in 
the system that could impact attendance and 
payment. 
• The Mayor’s Office and the Fund for 
the City of New York should amend the 
rules governing its Returnable Grant 
Fund (RGF) program so that FCC and 
GFCC providers can request interest-
free loans in the event of late payments 
from City agencies. While ACS is required 
by federal and state law to pay providers 
within 21 calendar days of receiving an 
invoice and NYCPS requires FCCNs to pay 
providers every two weeks, there are many 
bureaucratic challenges that result in slow 
payment processing. The RGF can help 
to mitigate the harm caused by payment 
delays. It already has systems in place to 
provide loans to human service providers 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
66
and FCCNs for existing City contracts and 
works with agencies to repay the loans 
directly. However, currently only non-profits 
are eligible to access the RGF.
5. Streamline how FCC and GFCC 
providers engage with City and State 
agencies to minimize disruptions in 
enrollment and staffing.
• OCFS should improve its orientation, 
application, and onboarding process 
for providers to adequately introduce 
providers to all agency and small business 
requirements. The OCFS orientation should 
include a live, remote option (not just an 
asynchronous video). The application process 
should allow providers to apply for their 
business license and CCAP participation 
simultaneously. Furthermore, OCFS should 
work with the NYC CCR&R and UFT to 
develop a standardized onboarding process, 
including getting oriented to systems like 
FAMS and CAPS, learning about the various 
agencies they will interact with, and how to 
contact staff at those agencies in the event of 
any problems. 
• OCFS should prioritize New York City 
FCC and GFCC providers in the substitute 
provider pool pilot currently being 
developed. In the FY2026 budget, New York 
State committed to establishing a substitute 
provider pool to support ECE programs 
across the state. It and the mechanisms 
to establish it will alleviate challenges 
providers face with staff hiring and their 
own ability to take time off. A pilot program 
is currently being developed to test the 
legal and institutional mechanisms needed 
to implement a substitute provider pool 
statewide. New York City is home to over 
half of all of OCFS’s licensed ECE programs. 
Additionally, over half of the state’s ECE 
programs are FCCs or GFFCs. In order for 
the State to invest in a successful substitute 
provider program, pilot efforts should be 
conducted in New York City and must center 
the needs of FCC and GFCC providers for 
substitute relief.
• DOHMH and OCFS should work together 
to establish clear, reasonable timelines 
for license and staff background check 
processing. They should improve 
providers access to DOHMH staff to 
discuss pending applications. The agencies 
should establish and strive to meet target 
application processing times (e.g., 10-15 
business days) and be transparent about 
those targets in the process with applicants. 
Prior to the Covid pandemic, providers 
were able to deliver paperwork directly to 
DOHMH offices and speak with DOHMH 
staff about license applications and staff 
background checks, which was effective 
for providers navigating these processes. 
DOHMH should publicize open office hours 
for providers to be able to walk into or call 
a DOHMH office where they can speak 
with a trained staff person who can provide 
technical assistance on pending applications. 
• DOHMH and OCFS should work 
together to improve written policy for 
site visits and violations that prioritizes 
education and safety. Providers report that 
inspectors have inconsistent interpretation 
of regulations. The agencies should 
modify the current site visit checklist so 
that it is in layman’s terms and in multiple 
languages. This checklist should describe 
what inspectors are evaluating and what 
constitutes a violation and should be used 
during the site visit. The inspection policy 
should include a way for providers to submit 
grievances regarding unfair or unprofessional 
inspections. Additionally, the agencies 
should modify the violation process. It should 
include a graduated violation process based 
on the severity of a violation. For example, 
DOHMH should issue warnings first before 
handing out violations for non-emergency 
or administrative issues. In the event of a 
non-emergency or administrative violation, 
providers should be given the opportunity to 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
67
fix the issue within 48 hours before violations 
are published. DOHMH should remove non-
emergency or administrative violations from 
public record after they have been resolved. 
OCFS should return to its prior policy of 
keeping serious or emergency violations 
available to the public for two years. 
• ACS should implement presumptive 
eligibility as has been permitted by the 
governor’s signature of A.4099 (Clark)/S.4667 
(Brouk) in 2024. This law permits Local 
Departments of Social Services (LDSSs) 
to implement presumptive eligibility for 
CCAP vouchers and utilize CCBG funding 
to cover cost of care during the eligibility 
determination process. Monroe County 
has successfully implemented presumptive 
eligibility with minimal instances of families 
not qualifying for a CCAP voucher.
6. Protect providers, their staff, and 
the families they support in response 
to federal and local immigration 
actions and policy changes. 
• HRA should partner with the NYC CCR&R 
and other community-based organizations 
to actively assist FCC and GFCC providers 
to maintain their Medicaid, SNAP, and 
other benefits. Providers are more likely 
than other working New Yorkers to rely 
on Medicaid and SNAP. However, they 
are also independent contractors or small 
business owners, who have a harder time 
than employees in completing applications 
requiring proof of employment. Furthermore, 
76 percent of providers were not born in the 
U.S. and may be fearful of interacting with 
government agencies at this time. For these 
two reasons, providers will disproportionately 
lose access to these critical benefits without 
active support from HRA to communicate 
with them thoughtfully and from community-
based organizations to combat the chilling 
effects. 
• New York State and City should backfill 
any federal funding cuts or freezes that 
directly impact ECE programming (i.e. 
CCDF, Head Start, and Temporary Assistance 
to Needy Families (TANF)) in order to 
minimize disruptions for programs, providers, 
and families. 
• New York State and New York City should 
continue to fund and grow programs, like 
Promise NYC and facilitated enrollment, 
that extend the CCAP voucher program to 
families regardless of immigration status. 
LDSSs administering these programs should 
collaborate to identify and eliminate barriers 
that prevent families from enrolling for 
assistance.
• New York State should provide 
universal representation to anyone 
at risk of deportation and invest in 
adequate legal services by passing the 
Access to Representation Act (A.270 
(Cruz)/S.141 (Holyman-Sigal)) and Building 
Unrepresented Immigrant Legal Defense 
Act (A.2689 (Cruz) /S.4538 (Liu)). Existing 
legal services in New York leave hundreds 
of thousands of New Yorkers without access 
to representation, which puts them at risk of 
family separation, detention in dangerous 
facilities, or deportation. Guaranteeing 
adequate access to legal representation for 
immigrants will directly support providers, 76 
percent of whom were not born in the U.S., 
as well as the immigrant families that they 
serve.
• New York State should protect 
immigrants’ rights by passing the New 
York for All Act (A.3506 (Reyes)/S.2235 
(Gounardes)). The bill prohibits state 
and local officers from enforcing federal 
immigration laws, funneling people into 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) 
custody, and sharing sensitive information 
with federal immigration authorities. It also 
ensures that people in custody are informed 
of their rights before being interviewed by 
ICE. The act prohibits ICE and Customs 
and Border Protection (CBP) from entering 
non-public areas of state and local property 
without a judicial warrant and begins the 
process of limiting their access to state 
information databases.

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
68
7. Provide more advanced training and 
support to meet the unique needs of 
providers as ECE professionals and small 
business owners.
• OCFS should create a searchable online 
library of available trainings that meet 
licensing requirements and make 
information about the Educational 
Incentive Program (EIP) more available. 
The current OCFS website requires staff and 
providers to search through the websites 
of multiple training organizations to find 
trainings of interest. OCFS could create one 
library of training options (or promote this 
feature of the Aspire Registry and support 
providers in signing up), searchable by topic, 
which would save providers and staff time 
and help them better connect to relevant 
training. This new online library should also 
better promote the EIP, which provides 75-
100 percent reimbursement for up to $2,500 
in training and education costs annually.
• OCFS should develop a survey to obtain 
feedback from training participants and 
require all training programs to offer 
the survey as part of the training. OCFS 
should dedicate staff to review survey 
findings on an annual basis. Providers 
overwhelmingly share a desire for more 
education and training on a wide range of 
issues and more in-depth trainings on many 
topics. Such topics include: working with 
special needs children; managing conflict 
with parents; mental health support; and 
using technology and social media for 
publicity. Requiring training providers and 
OCFS to offer participants the opportunity 
to give feedback on current and in-demand 
curriculum and requiring OCFS to review 
these surveys will greatly improve the 
training curriculum and providers’ expertise. 
• New York State should establish a 
permanent grant program for FCC and 
GFCC providers to cover renovations, 
repairs, or capital improvements. A 
permanent fund will strengthen the quality 
of ECE infrastructure. This fund can be 
launched with the $10 million allocated 
in the State FY2026 budget for capital 
grants to providers. This grant fund should 
be designed with sufficient flexibility to 
meet the needs of NYC-based FCC and 
GFCC providers, 78 percent of whom are 
renters, as well as the broader community 
of providers across the state. The grant 
program should be administered through a 
financial intermediary, such as a Community 
Development Financial Institutions (CDFI) 
like the Low Income Investment Fund (LIIF), 
that can leverage public resources with 
private or philanthropic funds and provide 
technical assistance during the application 
and construction processes. Working with an 
intermediary partner also allows New York 
State to avoid cumbersome reimbursement 
mechanisms, takes advantage of external 
expertise, and enables more efficient, 
equitable access to capital among providers 
who have historically struggled to access 
conventional financing. 
• OCFS, NYCPS, the NYC CCR&R, and 
UFT should better market online English 
and Spanish child development associate 
(CDA) certificates and EIP scholarships 
for the CDA. CUNY and SUNY CDA 
coursework can be completed online and 
the vast majority of providers are eligible 
for full scholarship (except for the cost of 
books) through the EIP. However, 26 percent 
do not think they can participate because 
of the amount of time to travel to in-person 
classes and many expressed concerns about 
the financial costs associated with the CDA. 
Regular promotion of these opportunities 
should be sent out by agencies and funded 
partners, like the NYC CCR&R and UFT, to 
providers in English and Spanish. 
• NYC Small Business Services should 
partner with the NYC CCR&R and 
other FCC and GFCC technical services 
providers to develop an online library 
of relevant small business training and 
service resources. Providers representing all 
business entity types expressed the need for 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
69
more information about their responsibilities 
as employers if and when they hire staff. 
The library should provide information 
for all common FCC and GFCC business 
entity types about necessary insurance 
requirements and beneficial programs, such 
as the State’s Paid Family Leave program, 
the State’s Secure Choice Retirement Savings 
Program, and the City’s Paid Safe and Sick 
Leave program. It should feature small 
business grant and no- or low-cost loan 
programs, including those offered by the City 
and State. It should feature vetted free or 
affordable programs for payroll processing 
and bookkeeping. It should also provide 
information about learning opportunities – 
from the CUNY CDA certificate program and 
City-sponsored, free ESL classes. 
Conclusion
Overwhelmingly, FCC and GFCC providers feel 
undervalued and disrespected. Our research 
demonstrates that their work is, in fact, being 
economically undervalued. As a result, the 
sustainability and viability of their businesses 
and the critical role they play in the city’s ECE 
system continues to be in jeopardy.
Our research also demonstrates that 
comprehensive redesign of policies and 
government programs is necessary to address 
these challenges. Creating a universal ECE 
system on its own or a wage subsidy policy on 
its own will not address these challenges. A 
package of policy solutions must be developed 
together and evaluated for their short- and long-
term impacts. Given that some policies can be 
implemented quickly, while others will require a 
phased approach, attention must also be paid 
to mitigation strategies to make sure that the 
rollout of one policy before another does not 
have unintended consequences that undermine 
the long-term goals of ECE policy and their 
benefits to families, existing ECE programs and 
staff, the city’s labor force and economy, and the 
social well-being of all New Yorkers. 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
70
References
Bilik, Lena, Mary Beth Salomone Testa, Suzanne Kahn, Nina Dastur, and Meredith Loomis Quinlan. Building Universal 
Public Childcare for Workers and Families. Roosevelt Institute. July 2025. https://rooseveltinstitute.org/wp-content/
uploads/2025/07/RI_Building-Universal-Public-Childcare-Workers-Families_Report_072025.pdf.
Bromer, Juliet, Toni Porter, Christopher Jones, Marina Ragonese-Barnes, and Jaimie Orland. Quality in Home-Based Child Care: 
A Review of Selected Literature. Washington, DC: Office of Planning, Research, and Evaluation, Administration for Children 
and Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; Erikson Institute and Mathematica, September 2021. https://
acf.gov/sites/default/files/documents/opre/HBCCSQ_LiteratureReview_2021-Remediated.pdf.
Child Care Aware of America. Economics and Child Care: Where Are We Now and Where Do We Go? July 2025. https://www.
childcareaware.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/07/Full-Report-Economics-and-Child-Care-Where-Are-We-Now-and-Where-
Do-We-Go.pdf.
District Council 37. Mayor Adams announces tentative agreement between DC 37, Local 205, and Day Care Council of New 
York to deliver raises for Child Care workers. October 16, 2024. https://www.dc37.net/news/newsreleases/2024/nr10_16. 
Empire State Campaign for Child Care. ESCCC Survey One-Pager. February 2025. https://empirestatechildcare.org/wp-
content/uploads/2025/02/ESCCC-Survey-One-Pager.pdf.
Ghilarducci, Teresa and Kevin Hassett. What if Low-Income American Workers Had Access to Wealth Building Vehicles Like 
the Federal Employees’ Thrift Savings Plan? Economic Innovation Group, March 2021. https://eig.org/wp-content/
uploads/2021/03/Hassett-Ghilarducci-White-Paper-IWBI.pdf. 
Melodia, Lauren. High Calling, Low Wages: Home-Based Early Care and Education Providers in New York City. Center for New 
York City Affairs, September 2023. https://www.centernyc.org/reports-briefs/high-calling-low-wages-home-based-early-
care-and-education-providers-in-new-york-city. 
Montoya, Elena, Lea J.E. Austin, Anna Powell, Yoonjeon Kim, Abby Copeman Petig, and Wanzi Muruvi. Early Educator 
Compensation: Findings From the 2020 California Early Care and Education Workforce Study. Center for the Study of 
Child Care Employment, University of California, Berkeley, August 23, 2022. https://cscce.berkeley.edu/publications/report/
early-educator-compensation/.
New York City Mayor’s Office of Operations. Mayor’s Management Report. September 2025. https://www.nyc.gov/assets/
operations/downloads/pdf/mmr2025/2025_mmr.pdf. 
New York State Department of Health. Current Reimbursement Rates for CACFP. July 1, 2025. https://www.health.ny.gov/
prevention/nutrition/cacfp/reimbrates.htm.
Parrott, James. The Road to and from Salary Parity in New York City in Early Childhood Education. Center for New York City 
Affairs, January 2020. http://www.centernyc.org/salary-parity-in-nyc.
Prenatal-to-3 Policy Impact Center. Child Care: From Market Failure to Strategic Investment. September 2025. https://
pn3policy.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/09/CC-failure-brief-FINAL.pdf.
Professional Development Program. Educational Incentive Program (EIP). University at Albany, State University of New York, 
2025. https://www.ecetp.pdp.albany.edu/eip.aspx.
Reid, Jeanne, Sharon Ryan, and Margaret Burchinal. “Promoting Quality in Programs for Infants and Toddlers: Comparing the 
Family Child Care and Center-Based Teaching Workforce.” Children and Youth Services Review 122 (December 1, 2020): 
105890. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2020.105890.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. IPUMS Current Population Survey: Version 12.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2025. 
https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V12.0.
U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey 5-Year Data (2009–2023). Last revised January 10, 2025. https://www.census.
gov/data/developers/data-sets/acs-5year.html.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service. Area Eligibility in Child Nutrition Programs. Policy Memo SP08 
CACFP04, SFSP03-2017. December 1, 2016. https://www.fns.usda.gov/cn/area-eligibility-memo.
U.S. Department of the Treasury. The Economics of Child Care Supply in the United States. September 2021. https://home.
treasury.gov/system/files/136/The-Economics-of-Childcare-Supply-09-14-final.pdf.
Workman, Simon. Where Does Your Child Care Dollar Go? Washington, DC: Center for American Progress, February 14, 2018. 
https://www.americanprogress.org/article/child-care-dollar-go/.
Workman, Simon, and Steven Jessen-Howard. New York State Cost of Quality Child Care Study. Washington, DC: Center for 
American Progress, November 2019. https://raisingnewyork.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2019/12/NY-Cost-of-Quality-
Report-Raising-NY.pdf.
Workman, Simon, and Jeanna Capito. “Re: Understanding the True Cost of Child Care in New York State.” Prenatal to Five 
Fiscal Strategies, January 19, 2023. https://newyork.edtrust.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/New-York-CC-CostModel-
results-memo_Jan2023.pdf.
Yellen, Janet L. “Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen on Shortages in the Child Care System.” U.S. Department 
of the Treasury, September 15, 2021. https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0355.

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
71
Appendix
A. Glossary
New York City’s early care and education system 
is incredibly complex, with care provided in 
different program types and settings, by 
people with different occupations (job titles), 
and interacting with many government 
agencies and policies. The language choices in 
this report are intentional.
 
Early care and education (ECE): This term 
is used to describe the universe of work that 
is often called child care, which includes both 
child care and education services for infants to 
children before they start kindergarten, as well 
as for school-aged children, typically up to the 
age of 12, outside of normal school hours.
 
Program types
Center-based: This describes ECE programs 
licensed to operate in commercial spaces. They 
may be operated by non-profit organizations or 
for-profit firms and must comply with State rules 
and regulations.
Family Child Care (FCC): FCCs are small 
businesses owned and operated by providers 
in their own homes. In New York City, FCC 
programs are registered by the City Department 
of Health and regulated by the State. They 
are officially called Family Day Care. They may 
have a maximum capacity of six children ages 
six weeks to under six years old, as well as two 
school-age children, for a total of eight children. 
They must hire additional staff for every two 
infants in care.
Group Family Child Care (GFCC): GFCCs 
are small businesses owned and operated by 
providers out of their homes, are licensed by 
the City Department of Health and regulated by 
the State. They are officially called Group Family 
Day Care. They’re distinguished from FCCs 
because they can care for up to 16 children (12 
children ages six weeks to under six years old, as 
well as four school age children), with sufficient 
staffing. They must hire additional staff for every 
two infants in care.
Home-based: This term is used to describe 
all ECE program types in residential settings: 
registered FCCs, licensed GFCCs, enrolled 
legally exempt family providers, and 
unregulated home-based care, provided 
by caregivers in their homes without any 
compliance or interaction with City and State 
rules and regulations. While the purpose of this 
report is to highlight the role of FCC and GFCC 
providers, the U.S. Census data can only provide 
insight on the entire home-based provider 
population, because it does not distinguish 
among these different home-based program 
types. 
Legally exempt provider: This term is used 
to describe providers enrolled to provide ECE 
in their home for up to eight children, so long 
as only two of the children are unrelated to the 
provider. Required to comply with certain health, 
safety, and education standards and training, 
they are legally exempt from other guidelines, 
because of the familial connection these 
providers have to the children and parents they 
serve. Enrolled legally exempt family providers 
are eligible to receive CCAP vouchers from 
income-eligible families. CNYCA will publish 
a separate report on its 2024 survey of legally 
exempt providers.
Pre-K and 3-K: These short-hand terms are used 
to describe Pre-K-For-All and 3-K-For-All, both 
programs administered by the New York City 
Public Schools (NYCPS). Both are school day, 
school year programs with no cost to parents, 
offered in both public schools and a variety of 
other center-, school-, and home-based settings. 
Extended-day and extended-year options are 
also available at some Pre-K and 3-K sites at 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
72
no cost for income-eligible parents and for an 
additional fee for all other parents. Please see 
insideschools.org/pre-kindergarten for a full 
description of Pre-K and 3-K various setting 
options.
Public: When describing an ECE program, this 
term means that the program is not only funded 
by the government, but run by a government 
agency, such as a 3-K-For-All program offered on 
site at a New York City public school.
Occupations
Assistant Educator: This term is used to 
describe people who assist Pre-K teachers, 
lead educators and providers in early care and 
education. They provide classroom support 
to lead educators and individual children; and 
support all the tasks making ECE function.
Director: This term describes the person at 
center-based and public school ECE programs 
responsible for administration and management.
Early care and education (ECE) worker: 
This often describes all occupations in an ECE 
setting. Due to data limitations, this term is 
used in Figure 24 to combine lead and assistant 
educators. 
Lead educator: The people responsible for 
the education of children under six years old. 
(This is distinct from a Pre-K teacher who only 
works with three- and four-year-olds.) They 
develop and lead curriculum to fulfill children's 
educational, developmental, cognitive, 
emotional and social needs. A lead teacher may 
also supervise assistants and volunteers.
Pre-K Teacher: This term is used to describe 
people working as pre-school teachers with 
three- and four-year-olds, in all ECE settings, 
not just limited to the NYCPS Pre-K and 3-K 
programs. 
Provider: We use this term to describe FCC and 
GFCC small business owners required to carry 
out multiple job functions.
 
Government agencies and policies
Administration for Children’s Services (ACS): 
The City agency responsible for determining 
eligibility for low-income families seeking to 
qualify for the Child Care Assistance Program 
(CCAP).
Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP): 
This is a voluntary federal program that 
ECE programs can participate in to receive 
reimbursement for meals to children. Providers 
can receive reimbursements for up to two 
meals and one snack per attendee per day, and 
the government has different reimbursement 
rates based on the low-income status of the 
provider or the community she serves. Notably, 
center-based ECE programs have higher 
reimbursement rates than providers.
Child Care Assistance Program (CCAP): Often 
known as “subsidized care” or “vouchers,” 
CCAP provides income-eligible parents a 
voucher to use at a regulated ECE program of 
their choosing. The program is overseen by the 
State Office of Children and Family Services 
(OCFS) and administered by local social service 
districts (ACS in New York City). CCAP pays ECE 
programs directly a significant portion of the 
price to recipient parents for the services their 
child is enrolled in. Funds for CCAP vouchers 
are set aside in the New York State budget and 
are largely financed from the Child Care and 
Development Fund (CCDF). Many of the CCAP 
policy designs are guided by federal CCDF 
rules.
Child Care Block Grant (CCBG): CCBG is New 
York State’s own terminology to describe CCDF 
funds distributed within New York State to Local 
Departments of Social Services (LDSSs), like New 
York City, which directly manage enrollment of 
families in the CCAP program.
Child Care Development Block Grant 
(CCDBG): CCDBG is the federal block grant 
component of CCDF. CCDBG funding to states 
is determined through a formula based on a 
variety of need-based factors, not demand for 
services.
Child Care Development Fund (CCDF): The 
largest federal funding source for child care. 
CCDF funds are distributed to states, tribes, and 
territories to help them administer CCAP for 
low-income families. OCFS is the lead agency 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
73
in New York State responsible for managing 
CCDF funds. OCFS must follow broad federal 
guidelines but also has significant autonomy in 
designing the State’s CCAP.
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene 
(DOHMH): The New York City agency 
responsible for licensing, registering, and 
regulating FCC and GFCC programs. DOHMH 
has a contract with OFCS, which has oversight 
authority of DOHMH.
New York City Public Schools (NYCPS): The 
City agency that administers the Pre-K, 3-K, 
and other ECE programs, like EarlyLearn, in the 
five boroughs. The majority of these programs 
are not delivered at public schools but at 
center-based ECE programs which contract 
with the City. NYCPS was previously called the 
Department of Education (DOE).
Office of Children and Family Services 
(OCFS): The New York State agency responsible 
for implementing ECE programs, in compliance 
with federal and state law. It has oversight 
authority and establishes policies and 
regulations that govern the ECE sector. In all 
counties except the counties of New York City, 
OCFS is responsible for licensing and registering 
ECE programs and ensuring that they meet 
regulatory standards.
Office of Child Care and Early Childhood 
Education: An office established by Mayor 
Eric Adams to implement the Mayor’s Blueprint 
for Early Care and Education and improve 
coordination across City agencies involved in 
ECE programs and policies.
 
Other
Attendance: refers to the number of children 
present in an ECE program on a given day. 
Typically, attendance is lower than enrollment, 
because enrolled children may be absent on a 
particular day for a variety of reasons, such as 
illness or vacation. New York’s CCAP voucher 
program currently reimburses providers based 
on attendance.
Capacity: Each ECE program type has a total 
potential seat capacity—the total number of 
children they can provide services to in the same 
hour or day—based on a number of factors 
(program type, age of children, square footage, 
staffing). Seat capacity can be reduced at any 
time if a program does not have sufficient staff 
on-site.
Child Care Resource & Referral Agencies 
(CCR&R): Non-profit organizations in New York 
counties that have a contract with OCFS to 
provide services to parents and ECE programs 
in their counties. These include helping parents 
find an ECE program that meets their needs and 
providing technical assistance and training to 
ECE programs.
Enrollment: refers to the number of ECE 
program seats that are accounted for based on 
contracts between the provider and the parent. 
Enrollment is typically higher than attendance, 
because enrolled children may be absent on a 
particular day for a variety of reasons. On August 
1, 2026 New York State must comply with CCDF 
rules to reimburse CCAP vouchers based on 
enrollment, not attendance.
Family Child Care Network (FCCN): Member 
organizations of individual providers. They 
offer technical assistance, training, and peer 
support delivered by paid staff. While providers 
may choose to join an FCCN to receive these 
supports, FCC providers are required to be 
members if they want to contract with the 
NYCPS to provide 3-K. 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
74
B. Data and Methodology
B-1. Survey Data
CNYCA worked with seven community-
based organizations to design, test, and 
administer a survey of providers. These partner 
organizations include: All Our Kin; ECE on the 
Move; the NYC CCR&R Consortium (which is a 
partnership of the Child Development Support 
Corporation, Chinese-American Planning 
Council, Committee for Hispanic Children & 
Families, and the Day Care Council of New 
York); and the Women’s Housing and Economic 
Development Corporation (WHEDco). The 
survey was translated into English, Mandarin 
and Spanish. CNYCA administered two surveys: 
one 60-question survey for FCC and GFCC 
providers; and a shorter 40-question survey for 
legally exempt family child care providers. The 
surveys are available upon request. 
CNYCA set a goal to survey 10 percent of the 
provider population, which would have included 
600 FCC or GFCC providers. A random sample 
of 10 percent of a population is the social 
science rule of thumb for producing accurate 
estimates about a population. Given the 
complexities of the survey, CNYCA recognized 
that random sampling was not truly possible. 
Trusted community-based organizations and 
staff would be needed to promote the survey, 
build trust with providers to encourage them to 
share detailed expense data, and help providers 
to complete it. CNYCA provided a $350 stipend 
to all providers who completed the survey. 
CNYCA promoted the survey in multiple ways, 
including sending a print postcard to every 
licensed FCC and GFCC provider in New York 
City, sending email and text announcements to 
providers engaged with our seven community-
based partners, and presenting the project at 
CCR&R professional development days. All 
providers were able to participate so long as 
they reside in New York City, have an active 
license number, and were in business in 2023.
CNYCA made the survey available from 
February to August 2024. We received interest 
from 1,364 providers, and 583 FCC and GFCC 
providers participated in the survey. After 
reviewing the surveys, CNYCA was able to 
analyze 465 completed surveys for this report. 
59 surveys were from FCC providers, 396 
surveys were from GFCC providers, and 10 
surveys were from providers who did not list 
their license type. 
It was important to CNYCA to obtain a 
representative sample of the FCC and GFCC 
provider population. Prior to conducting 
this survey, the only direct survey of licensed 
providers in New York City was limited to 
providers who have NYCPS contracts (Reid et al. 
2020). Very little is known about this population, 
but CNYCA utilized OCFS and NYCPS publicly 
available administrative data to determine 
the distribution of providers across the five 
boroughs; the breakdown between FCC and 
GFCC license types; the percentage of providers 
with NYCPS contracts; and the percentage of 
providers accepting CCAP vouchers. Figure A-1 
(below) lists the target distribution calculated 
from this administrative data as well as the 
percentage of completed surveys that fit into 
these categories. 
Overall, CNYCA came close to reaching our 
survey goals in most areas. However, our 
dataset oversampled providers in Brooklyn, 
providers with NYCPS contracts, and FCC 
providers who accept CCAP vouchers. Our 
sample is also limited to the languages we 
used to administer the survey. While we do not 
have any administrative data about language 
preferences of providers, we set targets based 
on CNYCA’s previous report about home-based 
ECE providers, which utilized the American 
Community Survey (Melodia 2023). It is likely 
that we oversampled Mandarin-speaking and 
English-speaking providers. Oversampling of 
some subpopulations within the FCC and GFCC 
provider population may lead to some bias in 
the results. 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
75
This survey is the largest sampling of FCC and 
GFCC providers in New York to date and, after 
Montoya et al’s (2020) survey in California, it is 
the second-largest in the country. Therefore, 
while it is important to keep the potential for 
bias in mind while interpreting the results, this 
data includes more observations than American 
Community Survey data, making it a more 
reliable source for quantitative analysis on 
providers.
B-2. Focus Groups
After reviewing the quantitative results of the 
survey, CNYCA and its seven community-
based partners designed a set of focus group 
questions to use for collecting further qualitative 
data from providers, particularly in areas where 
more feedback would help to interpret the 
survey data. Focus groups were administered 
in three languages: English, Mandarin, and 
Spanish. Each focus group used the same 
Figure A-1
Progress towards representative sample targets
Entity Type:
FCC
15%
12%
GFCC
85%
88%
Borough:
Bronx
52%
52%
Brooklyn
18%
22%
Queens
15%
12%
Manhattan
11%
10%
Staten Island
3%
4%
Client Type:
CCAP voucher recipient
71%
70%
NYCPS contract
22%
44%
Language:
English
36%
60%
French
1%
1%
Mandarin
3%
10%
Spanish
60%
62%
Other
6%
Target Distribution
Survey Distribution

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
76
standard questions. Due to provider preference 
and logistics, English and Spanish focus groups 
primarily took place over Zoom, while all 
Mandarin-language focus groups took place 
at the office of the Chinese-American Planning 
Council. 
All providers who had completed the survey 
were eligible to participate and received a 
stipend of $150 for participating in a focus 
group, and 126 providers signed up to 
participate. From June to July 2025, CNYCA 
organized eight focus groups, in which 
59 providers participated. Focus groups 
participants hailed from all five boroughs. Two-
thirds of focus group participants are based in 
either the Bronx or Brooklyn. The remaining 
providers closely reflected the borough 
distribution of licensed providers in the city: 
18 percent were from Queens; 10 percent 
were from Manhattan and three percent were 
from Staten Island. Focus groups oversampled 
providers with NYCPS contracts. While only 
22 percent of all city providers have NYCPS 
contracts, 61 percent of focus group participants 
provide contracted care to NYCPS. 
B-3. Revenue Methodology
FCC and GFCC providers provided details 
on their enrollment by age group as well as 
whether or not the enrolled child was full-time, 
part-time, special needs, private pay, a voucher 
recipient, a NYCPS-contracted seat, or one 
of their own children. The survey question on 
enrollment asked, “How many children did 
your business care for in the past month?” 
While one of the main findings of this research 
project was that providers experience significant 
fluctuations in enrollment, we assumed that their 
answers to this question remained consistent 
for the full year. Enrollment for private pay and 
voucher clients was calculated as 52 weeks 
annually minus any vacation providers reported 
on the survey. For NYCPS-contracted seats 
we calculated the total number of days of 
enrollment based on the terms of the contract 
(school-year or extended-year).
For each provider, we estimated an individual 
revenue, multiplying enrollment by reported 
pay rates. Providers answered questions about 
their private pay, voucher, and NYCPS contract 
terms and rates. For providers who listed a child 
enrolled in a certain age group or payment 
type but no corresponding rate, we imputed 
the mean weekly rate for the age group and 
payment type from our sample. The majority 
of NYCPS-contracted providers work with a 
FCCN, so the published contract rates were 
applied to the provider’s reported enrollment. 
Providers also answered questions about CACFP 
payments and OCFS Workforce Retention 
Grant payments in 2023. Their answers to these 
questions were added to the above revenue to 
obtain the estimated total annual revenue for 
each provider.
B-4. Operating Costs Methodology
Providers consulted their business records and 
submitted answers for the price and frequency 
(monthly, quarterly, or annual) of the following 
business costs in 2023: rent/mortgage, 
electricity, gas, water, telephone and internet, 
food for children in your care, cleaning supplies 
and/or services, repairs and maintenance, 
staff wages, health insurance, insurance 
(workers Comp, liability, homeowners, etc.), tax 
preparation and bookkeeping, licenses/permits/
background checks, membership dues, payroll 
services, marketing/advertising, professional 
development trainings, retirement fund 
contributions, taxes (federal, state, local income 
or business), other supplies (toys, diapers, etc.), 
transportation (to pick-up children, purchase 
food and supplies), and other. This list of 
categories was compiled in consultation with our 
seven community-based partners and FCC and 
GFCC providers who tested the survey before it 
was made public. 
We annualized the costs provided based on 
the frequency of the bill (monthly, quarterly, or 
annual), evaluated the distribution of values 
for errors (values that were logically too low 
or high), and established a logic for each cost 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
77
category to replace illogical extreme values as 
needed. The first five costs are costs for the 
entire household (rent/mortgage, electricity, 
gas, water, and telephone and internet). We 
weighted the annual value for each of these 
items based on the time-space percentage 
for each provider. Each provider answered 
questions about the number of rooms and hours 
per week dedicated to their business, so we 
were able to calculate a personal time-space 
percentage, using the same formula as IRS Form 
8829. After applying the time-space weight to 
the relevant items, we calculated an estimated 
total annual business cost for each provider.
B-5. Take Home Pay Methodology
Twelve percent of FCC providers and 42 percent 
of GFCC providers claim to pay themselves 
as W-2 payroll employees, a sign that they 
are using payroll services and, therefore, have 
likely established a fixed weekly wage to pay 
themselves. The majority of FCC and GFCC 
providers, however, do not pay themselves a 
regular wage at all, or compensate themselves 
as independent contractors or with cash – all 
signs that providers are not paying themselves a 
fixed weekly wage. 
In the report we use the term “take home pay” 
to describe the personal income providers pay 
themselves for their work, because it more 
accurately describes the compensation practice 
that the majority of providers use – using their 
net business income as their “take home pay,” 
available for personal use or to reinvest in their 
business. Regardless of what payroll processing 
providers use, our survey asked providers to 
list wages for staff separately from wages for 
themselves. In order to calculate take home pay, 
then, we subtracted the reported expenses, 
including staff wages, from the estimated 
revenue for each provider. 
We calculated individual take home pay for 
each provider in three distinct ways. First, we 
produced an estimated annual take home pay 
using the components described above as:
Estimated annual take home pay = estimated 
total annual revenue - estimated total annual 
business costs
Second, we calculated an individual estimated 
hourly take home pay in two ways. 
Hourly take home pay #1 = estimated annual 
take home pay / all working hours
Hourly take home pay #2 = estimated annual 
take home pay / open hours only
“All working hours” includes providers’ 
responses on their open business hours plus 
any additional hours they reported working 
outside of their open business hours cooking, 
cleaning, or shopping; doing paperwork; lesson 
planning; or other. (See Section 2-A.) This is the 
most accurate representation of their hourly 
take home pay, because it accounts for all hours 
worked. 
“Open hours only” includes providers’ 
responses on their open business hours but 
excludes additional hours they reported working 
outside of their open business hours. This is a 
less accurate representation of currently hourly 
take home pay, but it offers perspective on what 
hourly take home pay would be for providers 
if they were able to complete their work duties 
during their open business hours.

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
78
C. A Pension Program for FCC and 
GFCC Providers
“I’m 30, but I will be old one day. I hope I make 
it, and it would be sad if I had given my life 
working [in] this country–paying taxes, paying 
everything–and to not get a pension with the 
way we work…We work hard, I work hard.” – L., 
age 31, GFDC Brooklyn, NY
Summary
FCC and GFCC providers should be covered by 
the existing high-quality, professionally managed 
New York City and State public pension systems. 
The recently launched New York Secure Choice 
Savings Program will not meet the needs of 
providers with low and unstable revenue and 
take home pay for two reasons. First, meaningful 
asset accumulation for low-wage workers 
requires matching contributions. FCC and 
GFCC providers are part of the City’s publicly 
funded, subsidized ECE system, serving families 
through vouchers and contracts with ACS and 
NYCPS. Therefore, the appropriate retirement 
contribution matcher for these small businesses 
is the City. Second, low-wage workers need a 
defined benefit plan that pools risk and delivers 
predictable, stable retirement income. 
The Problem
As small business owners or independent 
contractors with low and unstable revenue, FCC 
and GFCC providers are at risk of being poor 
in their retirement years. They are currently 
unlikely to have the cash on hand to save or 
invest in retirement accounts for themselves or 
their staff. Furthermore, given their persistent 
low take home pay, they will likely have low 
Social Security benefit payments when they 
reach retirement age. This is due to the fact 
that Social Security benefits for sole proprietors, 
which is the business entity type for 42 percent 
of providers, is calculated based on net profit, 
which is how we define take home pay. 
In a future where a universal ECE system pays 
providers directly for all enrolled children, a true 
cost of care methodology could include funding 
for providers to make retirement savings account 
contributions on behalf of themselves and 
their employees. However, even in a universal 
system, there’s no guarantee that all seats will 
be utilized. Providers will continue to be in a 
situation where their take home pay, and what 
portion of it can be saved for retirement, is 
vulnerable to enrollment fluctuations. 
In 2025, New York established the New York 
Secure Choice Savings Program, a simple 
way for employers and employees to access 
a retirement savings account tied to their 
payroll systems. Now firms that have been 
in business for at least two years, have 10 or 
more employees, and do not currently offer 
a qualified retirement plan, are required to 
register for the program. Smaller firms, such 
as FCCs and GFCCs, can also access this free 
service. Employees can customize their payroll 
deductions (and opt out completely). If they 
make no changes to their account within 30 
days of enrollment, employees are automatically 
enrolled in the default setting to contribute 
three percent of their total pay to their personal 
Roth IRA. 
This is a fantastic resource for providers, given 
the challenges that small business owners like 
them face in securing cost-effective benefits 
packages from the private market. There is a 
great deal of evidence that, when enrolled in a 
program like this, low-wage workers will direct 
money into their own accounts (Ghilarducci and 
Hassett 2021). However, while this program may 
offer a mechanism for providers to establish a 
retirement savings plan for themselves and their 
employees (provided they use a payroll system), 
it is insufficient to meet the retirement savings 
needs of providers who are currently low-wage 
earners and will likely always have enrollment 
fluctuations impinging on their take home pay. 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
79
The Solution
A traditional pension plan, where participants 
make a set annual contribution as a percentage 
of their earnings and are guaranteed a pension 
payment level after a minimum number of 
years of service, is a more appropriate option 
for providers. This is because the final lifetime 
pension benefit level is not sensitive to 
fluctuations in take home pay, or to the market, 
or to how well one person can construct a 
portfolio. The guarantee to receive a pension 
in a certain tier after a minimum number of 
years of service (a vesting period), would further 
incentivize providers to make their required 
annual contribution even in tough financial 
times. 
The easiest way to establish a pension program 
for providers would be to include them in 
the existing, well-managed City and State 
pension plans for public employees. New York 
City operates five pension programs, each 
providing a pension to a specific sub-set of City 
employees.14 The New York State Common 
Retirement fund is a public pension plan for 
the employees of New York State government. 
These public plans successfully pool risk and 
deliver predictable, stable retirement income 
that should be extended to providers.
Providers serve their communities and, while 
they take on additional economic risk due 
to their status as independent contractors or 
small business owners, many providers are so 
committed to their businesses that they are 
willing to continue absorbing that risk in the 
present. What they want in exchange, however, 
is future stability, when they need medical care 
or can no longer work. 
Alternatively, providers could join the Cultural 
Institutions Retirement System, a multi-
employer plan serving cultural institutions and 
14 
 Of the five, there are three that would be natural connections 
for providers. These include the Teachers’ Retirement System, for 
educators who work for NYCPS, CUNY and NYC Charter Schools; The 
Board of Education Retirement System, for all other employees of 
NYCPS; and the Employees’ Retirement System, which covers most 
civilian employees that do not participate in pensions for specific 
uniformed agencies and educational institutions.
daycare workers who are members of DC37. 
However, they would be required to form an 
association and would need to demonstrate 
financial stability in order to be considered for 
membership. This would require significant 
organizing efforts and, given the financial 
precarity of providers, it is unlikely they could 
meet the CIRS standards for financial stability. 
Program Mechanics
Under the City’s and State’s current public 
pension programs, permanent public employees 
are assigned to a specific tier, based on their 
starting date of employment. They have a 
set percentage of their wages deducted 
during every payroll period based on their 
salary. For example, Tier 6 NYCERS members 
earning $45,000 or less annually, contribute 
three percent of their earnings towards the 
pension plan.15 The City agency where they 
are employed also has a budget to make a 
contribution on behalf of each employee. 
Agency contributions are based on actuarial 
calculations set by the City Comptroller. After a 
minimum of five years of service, Tier 6 members 
can draw their full benefit starting at 63 years of 
age.16 Those who work for the City for less than 
20 years receive a retirement benefit of 1.67 
percent times their final average salary (FAS) 
multiplied by the years of employment.
These public pension programs are governed by 
state and/or municipal law and those laws could 
be amended to include licensed FCC and GFCC 
providers. Agency budgets could be adjusted 
so that OCFS, ACS, or NYCPS could contribute 
towards these providers' pensions easily 
because they already have mechanisms in place 
to make contributions for their own agency staff. 
The City and State would need to develop a 
unique way to collect annual contributions from 
15 
 All employees who joined the NYCERS public employee 
retirement system on or after April 1, 2012 are in Tier 6. 
16 
 Tier 6 members must contribute to the pension program until 
they separate from City service or until they retire. Those who complete 
their five years and want to retire earlier than 63 years of age receive a 
benefit reduction. For example, if you retire at 55 years of age, there is a 
52 percent benefit reduction. 

Dignified Pay for Quality Care
80
these small business owners (because they are 
not on the City or State payroll). While this may 
seem like a bureaucratic obstacle, it would be 
mitigated by the ease with which City and State 
agencies could contribute towards the program. 
There would also need to be a unique method 
for calculating providers’ FAS, given the 
fluctuation in enrollment and its impact on 
take home pay. We recommend that the public 
pension program adopt an FAS equivalent 
to the appropriate compensation level in the 
ECE sector-wide career ladder, developed by a 
group of policy experts, led by CUNY PDI and 
Jenn O'Connor, principal at Jenn O'Connor 
Consulting, LLC. The FAS should be tied to 
the appropriate career ladder position for each 
retiring FCC or GFCC provider, regardless of 
whether or not the provider was able to pay 
themselves that salary. 
For example, according to a proposed career 
ladder, an FCC or GFCC provider opening 
their business with a high school diploma or 
equivalent, should have received a starting 
salary of $57,274 and her salary would grow 
to $66,302 after 15 years in businesses (or 
more if she attained higher, relevant education 
credentials during the time period). She 
would receive a monthly retirement benefit of 
$1,366.47 per month after retiring at 63 years of 
age. This would be in addition to Social Security 
benefits and any retirement savings accounts 
she was able to contribute towards. 
Given the persistent low wages in the sector 
and the amount of time it will take to move the 
City and State to a universal child care system 
with a true cost of care methodology, we also 
strongly recommend that the City and State 
develop this pension program immediately, 
enroll all licensed FCC and GFCC providers in 
the program, and acknowledge the years of 
service they’ve already provided along with 
an estimate of what salary they should have 
received during that time period using a true 
cost of care methodology and career ladder. 
Additionally, we strongly recommend that the 
City make this pension available to providers 
who had been in business for 10 years or more 
but have closed their businesses in the past 
10 years. This retroactive membership would 
support over 1,400 providers, many of whom 
closed businesses as a result of the design and 
launch of the City’s Pre-K and 3-K programs that 
privileged contracting with center-based ECE 
programs.