more 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
JOCELYN E. STRAUBER 
COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE Release #33-2025 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 3, 2025 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
  
    
DOI ISSUES ANNUAL ANTI-CORRUPTION REPORT FOR 2024 FOCUSED ON 
CORRUPTION RISKS ARISING FROM COMPLEX AND BURDENSOME REGULATIONS 
 
Today, Jocelyn E. Strauber, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Investigation 
(“DOI”), issued the 2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report on the potential for increased corruption risks posed 
by complex, burdensome regulatory rules, and the enforcement of such rules. The goal of the Report is to 
highlight regulatory and enforcement schemes that may increase the risk for corrupt or noncompliant 
behavior due to the design, complexity, stringency, burdens, and costs of related rules and practices. While 
government regulation provides vital public benefits , including protecting the environment, public health, 
safety, civil rights, and consumers, overcomplicated and burdensome regulations and practices can create 
unintended incentives for individuals or entities to avoid compliance with regulations, including through 
corrupt and illegal means.   
 
DOI Commissioner Jocelyn E. Strauber said, “As the City’s anticorruption agency, DOI well knows 
the value of City rules and regulations intended to protect the public, and their consistent enforcement. We 
also recognize that complex and burdensome regulatory schemes that are costly to comply with pose their 
own corruption and non- compliance risks. DOI encourages agencies to conduct regular reviews of such 
processes, identify potential corruption vulnerabilities, and implement appropriate risk mitigation measures. 
I want to thank all the City agencies that responded to our questionnaire for their commitment to compliance 
and to ensuring an effective regulatory framework.” 
 
DOI’s Annual Anti-Corruption Report is mandated by Executive Order 105 (“EO 105”) , which 
consolidated the Inspector General function within DOI and established the DOI Commissioner as the City’s 
independent Inspector General . EO105 also gave agency heads primary responsibility for maintaining 
corruption-free agencies, and called upon DOI to assist in their efforts by preparing this annual Report, 
which summarizes agency -identified corruption vulnerabilities and agencies’ remedial strategies. Since 
2020, these annual reports have focused on City agencies’ responses to a corruption-related issue. Unlike 
other DOI Reports, these annual reports rely primar ily on information and analysis supplied to DOI by City 
agencies, rather than DOI’s own investigative work. 
 
For this Report, DOI analyzed questionnaire responses from 51 agencies. The Report covers the 
period of October 1, 2023, to September 30, 2024. A copy of the Report is attached to this release and can 
be found on DOI’s Reports page by clicking here.  
 
This Report relies on City agencies’ own assessments to provide a broad overview of the approach 
agencies are taking to address risks of corruption, misconduct, or other criminal activity. In order to promote 
candid responses by the participating agencies, the individual responses have been aggregated or 

2 
 
anonymized, as appr opriate. For this 2024 Report, DOI developed a questionnaire to explore agencies’ 
perspectives on potential corruption risks posed by their regulatory and enforcement processes . The 
questionnaire asked about the application processes for licenses, permits,  certifications, grants, 
registrations, or public benefits or services reviewed by the agencies, if applicable; the compliance and 
enforcement activities of the agency; and the agency’s assessments of the risks posed by those processes 
and activities and any anti-corruption tools already in place. It also asked agencies about application fees, 
the length of time to receive a determination, and details of the determination process.  
 
Nearly half of the responding agencies reported that they review applications for licenses, permits, 
certifications, grants, and/or registrations, or other similar types of programs, while many fewer do so for 
public benefits. About two- thirds of respondents conduct inspections, issue violations, or perform other 
activities to en sure compliance with and enforce regulations. Average determination times for the 
applications varied based on the complexity of the application or the nature of the service being applied for, 
and most agencies reported that delays in determinations were due to incomplete submissions or missing 
documentation.  
 
Sixteen agencies offered suggestions for reform including resources for additional staffing; 
proposed changes in burdensome, confusing, or unnecessary laws, rules, or regulations; and technology 
changes, including moving applications to an online platform. At least one agency suggested leveraging 
data matching opportunities across databases and agencies to verify information provided by applicants . 
Several agencies said that additional staff would increase their capacities for monitoring and enforcement 
and that additional staff is needed for oversight, audit, and fraud detection and prevention duties.    
 
Regulations and enforcement can protect workers and consumers, ensure that our buildings and 
infrastructure are safe, protect limited public resources  designated for vulnerable recipients, and ensure 
fairness by applying the same rules in the same manner across industries and professions. But regulations 
can have the unintended consequence of creating additional corruption risks of their own, when compliance 
is or is perceived to impose undue costs and burdens on members of the public. City agencies should 
evaluate the regulations they are responsible for implementing and enforcing with these challenges in mind. 
And when it is determined that a regulatory or enforcement process, even a cumbersome one, is necessary, 
it is the responsibility of the City agency involved to remain aware of corruption risks and to review the 
processes on a regular basis and to take steps to reduce any risks identified. DOI encourages agencies to 
remain aware and vigilant about potential corruption and fraud risks inherent in any municipal process, and 
to conduct regular reviews of processes to implement risk mitigation measures . 
This Report was prepared by Director of Intergovernmental Affairs and Special C ounsel Rebecca 
Chasan and former DOI Investigative Attorney Alix Hirsch, and was supervised by Deputy Commissioner 
of Legal Affairs and General Counsel Andrew Brunsden. 
 
 
 
 
DOI is one of the oldest law-enforcement agencies in the country and New York City’s corruption watchdog. Investigations 
may involve any agency, officer, elected official or employee of the City, as well as those who do business with or receive benefits 
from the City. DOI’s strategy attacks corruption comprehensively through systemic investigations that lead to high-impact arrests, 
preventive internal controls and operational reforms that improve the way the City runs. 
 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New York City 
Department of Investigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2024 Annual  
Anti-Corruption Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber 
Commissioner 
 
 
 
 
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
 
Table of Contents 
I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................................. 1 
II. Background ............................................................................................................................................. 1 
III. The Questionnaire Results ........................................................................................................................ 6 
A. Respondents ....................................................................................................................................... 6 
B. Application Processes and Agency Determinations ................................................................................. 7 
1. Application Determination Times ....................................................................................................... 7 
2. Application Fees .............................................................................................................................. 9 
3. Determination Process ..................................................................................................................... 9 
C. Compliance and Enforcement Activities .................................................................................................. 9 
1. Inspections Violations and Enforcement ............................................................................................. 9 
D. Agency Self-Assessment of Complexity, Risk, and Integrity Controls ...................................................... 10 
1. Application Complexities ................................................................................................................. 10 
2. Risks of Corruption in Application and Determination Processes ......................................................... 11 
3. Risks of Corruption in Compliance and Enforcement ......................................................................... 12 
4. Training, Integrity Controls, and Other Anti-Corruption Tools .............................................................. 12 
5. Reform Recommendations .............................................................................................................. 13 
IV. Conclusion ............................................................................................................................................ 14 
 
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
1 
 
I. Introduction 
The Commissioner of the Department of Investigation (“DOI”) serves as the 
City’s independent inspector general, supervising a staff of Inspectors Generals, 
investigators, attorneys, forensic auditors, computer forensic specialists, and 
administrative personnel. Mayoral Executive Order No. 105 (“E.O. 105”) established 
this structure in 1986, consolidating the Inspector General functions of various City 
agencies within DOI.   
 
E.O. 105 also made clear that agency heads “remain principally responsible for 
maintaining corruption-free agencies through this formal collaborative arrangement 
by developing procedures and systems to protect against corrupt and other cri minal 
activity affecting their agency, by hiring employees of integrity and competence, by 
careful managerial oversight and high-quality supervision of agency employees, and 
by adequate review and monitoring of fiscal commitments and processes within their 
respective agency.” This mandate is also reflected in New York City Charter § 389(a), 
which assigns agency heads the responsibility for maintaining “an internal control 
environment and system which is intended to maximize the effectiveness and 
integrity of agency operations and to reduce the vulnerability of the agency to fraud, 
waste, abuse, error, conflict of interest, and corruption.”   
 
E.O. 105 calls upon DOI to assist agencies in their efforts by preparing this 
Annual Anti-Corruption Report. The Annu al Anti-Corruption Report is intended to 
describe corruption risks identified at City agencies and the strategies identified by 
agencies, in consultation with the various Inspectors General at DOI, to address those 
hazards. Although E.O. 105s mandate applies only to Mayoral agencies, DOI invited 
non-mayoral agencies to participate in this report and 10 non -mayoral agencies 
contributed as well as 41 mayoral agencies.   
 
DOI’s Anti-Corruption Report, unlike DOI’s other reports, is not the product of 
DOI’s investigative work, but rather provides a broad overview of approaches taken 
by City agencies to address risks of corruption, misconduct, or other criminal activity. 
DOI generally obtains this information by submitting questions to other city agencies 
and analyzing their responses. The public release of this report is intended to promote 
information-sharing and transparency around corruption hazards and the measures 
that are being used by City agencies to combat corruption. In order to promote candid 
responses by the agencies participating in this and future questionnaires, the 
individual responses have either been aggregated or anonymized, as appropriate.   
II. Background 
The focus of the 2024 Anti-Corruption Report (the “Report”), which covers the 
period of Octob er 1, 2023, to September 30, 2024, is the potential for increased 
corruption risks posed by complex, burdensome regulatory rules, and the enforcement 
of such rules. The goal is to highlight regulatory and enforcement programs that have 
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
2 
 
rules and practices that may increase the risk for corrupt or noncompliant behavior 
due to their design, complexity, stringency, burdens, costs, or other reasons. While 
government regulation provides vital public benefits including protecting the 
environment, public health, safety, civil rights, and consumers, overcomplicated and 
burdensome regulations and practices can create unintended incentives for 
individuals or entities to avoid compliance with regulations , including through 
corrupt and illegal means.   
 
  T he “fraud triangle” is a theory used to understand why some people commit 
fraud..
1 According to the fraud triangle model,  there are three factors that must be 
present to induce people to commit fraud.2 These factors are motivation (or perceived 
pressure), opportunity, and rationalization.3 These three elements are utilized by the 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants in the current U.S. auditing 
standards as a model to categorize risk factors for fraud.
4 
 
Motivation refers to the incentive to engage in corrupt behavior.5 In the context 
of this Report, motivation may  increase if regulatory compliance  is deemed too 
difficult or if regulatory enforcement is deemed overly punitive or harsh. For example, 
the lengthier or more burdensome an application, the greater the motivation may be 
to avoid it.  
 
Opportunity is the circumstance that may prompt a person to believe they can 
engage in fraud or corruption undetected.
6 Opportunity can arise from, among other 
things, weak internal controls, lack of segregation of duties, or certain economic 
conditions.7 In the context of regulations, opportunity may present when there are 
insufficient staff at the agency to process  applications or properly enforce rules. 
Opportunity may arise from insufficient supervision, backlogged processing times, or 
outdated payment systems. Even when motivation and opportunity exist, most people 
choose not to engage in corrupt or fraudulent behavior. Therefore, the model posits 
that rationalization is necessary as well, that is, a person is able to justify his or her 
behavior.
8 Rationalization may include the perception that “everyone is doing it” or 
                                                           
1 Leandra Lederman, “The Fraud Triangle and Tax Evasion,” Iowa Law Review 106 (March 2021): 
1153–56.  
2 Michael J. Molder, “Why Honest People Commit Fraud,” Pennsylvania Lawyer 40 (November –
December 2018): 34–36. 
3 “The Fraud Triangle,” National Whistleblower Center, https://www.whistleblowers.org/fraud-
triangle/, accessed August 27, 2025.  
4 Codification of Accounting Standards and Procedures, Clarified Statements on Auditing Standards, 
AU-C § 240.11.  The standards define fraud risk factors as “[e]vents or conditions that indicate an 
incentive or pressure to perpetrate fraud, provide an opportunity to commit fraud, or indicate attitudes 
or rationalizations to justify a fraudulent action.” 
5  National Whistleblower Center, “The Fraud Triangle.” 
6 Id. 
7 Molder, “Why Honest People Commit Fraud,” supra fn. 2. 
8 Id. 
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
3 
 
that the benefit of avoiding the burden of the regulation or its enforcement outweighs 
the risks of detection and other costs of violating the law. 
 
New York City  has a sprawling regulatory and enforcement system that  
protects the benefits and services administered by government agencies, and various 
fields that require government permits and licenses. The areas subject to regulation 
are vast, ranging from public assistance, public safety, business licensing, 
infrastructure, arts and culture, to economic development and more. The City 
administers building permits, pedicab licenses, cash assistance, sound and event 
permits, tax expenditures, short-term rental registrations, and film permits, and also 
conducts plumbing, health, business license, and housing inspections, among myriad 
of others. Fo r the public to access needed licenses, registrations, permits, and 
benefits, the applicant must typically fill out an application to the administering 
agency. The complexity of each  application varies based on the applicable laws and 
regulations, the  permission or benefit sought , and any public  health and safety 
impact. Applications that require the completion of multiple tasks, the submission of 
multiple documents, lengthy instructions, frequent denials requiring resubmission, 
or a consultation with e xperts or other third parties prior to submission are 
particularly burdensome. An application process  that is overly complicated, or 
perceived as such, may increase both the motive to find a work -around — including 
through fraud or other corrupt and illegal means — and the ability to rationalize that 
misconduct.   
 
DOI has investigated many cases where City officials and/or members of the 
public engaged in fraudulent conduct in order to avoid the burden of a regulatory 
process, avoid the consequences of enforcement, or simply to take advantage of a 
regulatory or enforcement scheme to enrich themselves. For example, in September 
2024, a DOI investigation led to the arrest, and subsequent convictions, of two high -
ranking Fire Department chiefs who exploited a backlog in their Fire Code 
compliance unit to expedite inspections  of fire safety and inspection systems for a 
price, benefitting the property owners who agreed to pay bribes .
9 In July 2024, a 
pedicab driver pled guilty to bribing a City inspector in exchange for obtaining 
authentic pedicab registration plates outside of th e registration plate lottery to 
shortcut the City’s licensing process.
10 Similarly, in December 2023, DOI issued a 
report detailing ongoing corruption vulnerabilities  in the joint Department of 
Buildings and Department of Environmental Protection process for asbestos 
                                                           
9 United States Attorney’s Office, Southern District of New York, “Two Former High-Ranking FDN Y 
Officials Charged with Bribery, Corruption, and False Statements Offenses,” press release, September 
16, 2024, available at: https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/press-releases/2024/September/Saccavino and 
Cordasco Indictment PR.pdf, accessed August 27, 2025. 
10 New York City Department of Investigation, “Pedicab Driver Pleads Guilty to Bribing a City 
Inspector to Obtain Pedicab Registration Plates,” press release, July 17, 2024, available at: 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/press-releases/2024/July/32Alimov07.17.2024.pdf, accessed August 27, 
2025. 
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
4 
 
inspections required prior to the issuance of construction permits. 11 In connection 
with that report, DOI found that certain agency regulatory processes and procedures 
created an opportunity for  certified asbestos inspectors to submit false 
documentation of asbestos inspections  undetected, allowing them to avoid an 
expensive regulatory requirement and potentially speed up the permitting process. 
 
Accordingly, for this year’s Report, DOI developed a questionnaire (the 
“Questionnaire” or “DOI’s 2024 Anti-Corruption Questionnaire”) to explore agencies’ 
perspectives on the impact of their regulatory and enforcement processes  on 
corruption risk. The Questionnaire asked about the application processes for licenses, 
permits, certifications, grants, registrations, or public benefits or services reviewed 
by the agencies, if applicable; the compliance and enforcement activities of the 
agency; and the agency’s  assessments of the risks posed by those processes and 
activities and any anti -corruption tools already in place . The Questionnaire also  
asked agencies about application fees, the length of time to receive a determination, 
and details about the determination process. To assess the public perception of each 
agency’s processes, the Questionnaire asked agencies if they track complaints from 
the public about programs and, if so, which program receives the greatest number of 
complaints. The Questionnaire asked agencies about their compliance and 
enforcement practices relating to  the program regulations they administer : 
specifically, whether the agencies conduct inspections, issue violations, or engage in 
other enforcement actions, and wh ether these enforcement actions might 
unintentionally incentivize corruption.  
 
The Questionnaire asked agencies to self-evaluate the level of complexity and 
risk associated with the applications and related processes for determinations made 
in connection with their programs. Agencies provided details about their applications 
for complex programs that may contribute to corruption risks , such as  long 
application instructions, the  need to submit  multiple documents from different 
sources or agencie s, a high rate of incorrect or improperly submitted  applications, 
and/or a need to consult with a third -party in order to comply with requirements or 
complete application tasks.  Finally, the Questionnaire  asked agencies to propose 
suggestions for reform to  address corruption or noncompliance risks posed by 
complex, burdensome, or costly regulations and processes at the agency.   
 
Nearly half of the responding agencies reported that they review applications 
for licenses, permits, certifications, grants, and/or registrations, or other similar types 
of programs, while many fewer do so for public benefits. About two- thirds of 
respondents conduct inspections, issue violations, or perform other activities to 
ensure compliance with and enforce regulations. Average determination times for the 
                                                           
11 New York City Department of Investigation, “DOI’s Investigation into Asbestos Safety Regulation 
Governing Certified Asbestos Investigators,” December 2023, available at:  
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/press-releases/2023/December/40CAIRpt.Release.12.14.2023.pdf, 
accessed August 27, 2025.  
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
5 
 
applications varied based on the complexity of the application or the nature of the 
service being applied for, and most agencies reported that delays in determinations 
were due to incomplete submissions or missing documentation.  
 
Overall, agencies demonstrated a knowledge or understanding of potential 
risks in their application, determination, compliance, and enforcement processes . 
However, there were several agencies that denied any risk of corruption or fraud 
existed, a claim that seems implausible based on DOI’s experience. With respect to 
application and determination processes, agencies overwhelmingly pointed to the 
submission of fraudulent documents or misrepresentation of information as the 
primary fraud and corruption risk. As it relates to compliance and enforcement, the 
most frequently cited risk was bribery of inspectors or other enforcement staff. 
Agencies offered a range of suggestions, from increased staffing to regulatory and 
technological reforms, to furt her mitigate the identified risks.  Agencies report that 
they currently employ a variety of integrity controls to prevent fraud and corruption 
in applications and enforcement including anti-corruption training , multi-level 
reviews, and audits. 
 
As the City’s anticorruption agency, DOI strongly supports efforts to ensure 
compliance with City rules and regulations and to take appropriate investigative and 
enforcement action with respect to conduct that poses a risk to public health or safety, 
jeopardizes public resources, or involves  corrupt or criminal conduct . However, it is 
also important to consider the unintended impacts of regulatory and enforcement 
actions, and to achieve the appropriate balance between the critical interests served 
by regulation and enforcement and the burdens, complexities, and costs of particular 
regulatory programs and rules.  As such, DOI encourages agencies to remain aware 
and vigilant about potential corruption and fraud risks inherent in any municipal 
process, and to conduct regular reviews  of processes to implement risk mitigation 
measures. Studies have found a positive correlation between increased regulatory 
burden or complication and corruption.
12 In assessing re gulatory and enforcement 
processes, agencies must balance the corruption risk against the utility or necessity 
of the government process. Regulations and enforcement can protect workers and 
consumers, ensure that our buildings and infrastructure are safe, confirm that  
limited public resources go to the intended recipients, and ensure fairness by applying 
the same rules in the same manner across industries and professions. And when it is 
determined that a regulatory or enforcement process, even a cumbersome one, is 
necessary, it is the responsibility of the City agenc y involved to remain aware of 
corruption risks by reviewing the processes on a regular basis and tak ing steps to 
reduce any risks identified.  
                                                           
12 Mohammad Amin and Yew Chong Soh, Does Greater Regulatory Burden Lead to More Corruption? 
Evidence Using Firm-Level Survey Data for Developing Countries, Policy Research Working Paper 
9149 (Washington, DC: World Bank Group, February 2020), 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/server/api/core/bitstreams/ef43fa2a-84c5-5ba8-9813-
21a199961451/content, ac cessed August 27, 2025. 
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
6 
 
III. The Questionnaire Results 
 
A. Respondents   
 
There were 51 respondents to DOI’s 2024 Anti -Corruption Questionnaire. 
Forty-one were mayoral agencies and ten were non-mayoral agencies. Table 1 below 
lists the agencies and offices that submitted a response.  
 
Table 1. Respondents to DOI’s 2024 Anti-Corruption Questionnaire 
Administration for Children’s Services   Department of Veteran’s Service  
Board of Elections  Department of Youth and Community 
Development  
Business Integrity Commission   Economic Development Corporation  
Campaign Finance Board  Financial Information Services Agency  
Civilian Complaint Review Board  Fire Department  
Commission on Human Rights  Health and Hospitals  
Department for the Aging   Human Resources Administration  
Department of Buildings  Landmarks Preservation Commission  
Department of City Planning  Law Department  
Department of Citywide Administrative 
Services  
Mayor’s Office  
Department of Consumer and Worker 
Protection  
Mayor’s Office of Contract Services  
Department of Correction   Mayor’s Office of Criminal Justice  
Department of Cultural Affairs  Mayor’s Office of Media and Entertainment  
Department of Design and Construction  New York City Emergency Management  
Department of Environmental Protection  New York City Employee Retirement System  
Department of Finance  New York City Housing Authority  
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene  New York City Housing Development 
Corporation (HDC)  
Department of Homeless Services  Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings  
Department of Housing Preservation and 
Development  
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner  
Department of Investigation  Office of Labor Relations  
Department of Parks and Recreation  Office of Management and Budget  
Department of Probation  Office of Tax Administrative Appeals  
Department of Records and Information 
Services  
Office of Technology and Innovation  
Department of Sanitation  Police Department  
Department of Small Business Services  School Construction Authority  
Department of Transportation  Taxi and Limousine Commission  
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
7 
 
B. Application Processes and Agency Determinations 
Out of the 51 respondents, 24 (47.1%) reported they review applications for 
licenses, permits, certifications, grants, and/or registrations, or other similar types of 
programs. Some agencies administer several programs that require an application 
process and listed their top three most frequently appl ied-for licenses, permits, 
certifications, grants, and/or registrations. These services include for example, grant 
applications, licenses to operate taxicabs, and land use permits. The application 
processes varied in scope and style, details of which will be discussed below. Only 
seven (13.7%) of the 51 respondents said they review applications for public benefits 
or services such as food stamps, childcare vouchers, and/or cash assistance. Just one 
agency reported reviewing applications for both categories. 
 
1. Application Determination Times   
 
Determination times for the agencies’ applications varied depending on agency 
and program. This data point is relevant to a corruption risk analysis because an 
excessively lengthy determination time, or one perceived as such,  could increase a 
potential applicant’s motivation or opportunity to avoid the regulatory process or to 
engage in corrupt behavior to shortcut it. Chart 1 shows the average length of time 
for applications, licenses, and permit determinations as reported by the agencies that 
responded to this question . Chart 2  depicts the average length of time for public 
benefits and services application determinations  as report ed by the agencies that 
responded to this question. Some of the agencies reported target determination times 
that were shorter than the actual determination times and identified several reasons 
for these variances. The most common explanation for an actual determination time 
exceeding a target determination time wa s incomplete applications or missing 
supporting documentation.  Other explanations included delays in the applicant 
responding to questions or requests for additional information, agency staffing 
shortages, a high volume  of applications  for particular programs, and/or the 
requirement of that an agency obtain third -party approval before making a final 
determination.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
8 
 
Chart 1. Average Application, License, and Permit Determination Time   
 
 
Chart 2. Average Public Benefits and Services Application Determination 
Time 
 
  
 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Less than 24 hours Between 1 day and 1
week
Between 1 week and
1 month
Between 1 month and
3 months
More than 3 months
Responding Agencies
Determination Time
Average Application, License, Permit, Etc. 
Determination Time
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Less than 24 hours Between 1 day and 1
week
Between 1 week and 1
month
Between 1 month and
3 months
More than 3 months
Responding Agencies
Determination Time
Average Public Benefits and Services 
Application Determination Time
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
9 
 
2. Application Fees   
 
Twenty-two agencies (73.3%) reported that the applications they process 
required a fee, while eight  (26.7%) reported that no fee is required . Reported fees 
ranged from $25 per application to thousands of dollars per application depending on 
the subject of the application. 
3. Determination Process   
  To reach a determination on an application, agencies use multi-layered review 
processes and/or designate particular employees to handle review . M any agencies 
reported that they will not review applications until they are fully complete. Agencies 
also reported that they have specific teams designated to review applications for their 
programs. Many said that after the specially designated team reviews the 
application, an attorney conducts a secondary review , and then submits  the 
application to an executive for final approval . Some a gencies said they review 
applications for compliance with regulations that dictate the requirements of the 
applications and if an application is denied, some agencies give applicants the option 
to have a hearing to discuss the reasons. At least one agency reported that it has a 
peer-review panel that awards the benefit through a scoring system  and others 
reported that they process the applications, but actual determinations are made by 
third-parties. In order to reduce the motivation, opportunity and rationalization to 
engage in corrupt behavior to avoid a lengthy and burdensome determination process, 
agencies should strive to streamline these processes where possible while still 
collecting necessary information and obtaining required approvals. 
 
C. Compliance and Enforcement Activities 
 
1. Inspections Violations and Enforcement  
 
Thirty-two (62.7%) of the responding agencies reported that  they conduct 
inspections, issue violations, or perform other activities to ensure compliance with or 
enforce regulations. Of the agencies that said they do engage in enforcement actions, 
the types of enforcement varied. Several reported that  they issue violatio ns, 
summons, and directives, while other agencies reported that they prevent licensees 
from performing functions if they are not in compliance with the regulations. At least 
one agency said that violations could lead to investigations and revocation of 
licensees. Others said that they issue warnings and give applicants a chance to rectify 
the noncompliance before more serious measures are taken such as issuing summons. 
One agency reported that it requires a security deposit prior to issuing the applied-
for permit to help protect  against noncompliance. At least one agency require s 
applicants to submit annual proof of compliance. Many agencies expressed a desire 
to work with the applicants accused of noncompliance to remedy the situation rather 
than issue violations.   
 
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
10 
 
In terms of identifying noncompliance for potential enforcement action, several 
agencies stated that they rely on the City’s 311 reporting system or public complaints 
to address allegations of noncompliance, while others reported engaging in proactive 
monitoring. At least two agencies reported that they have special investigation units 
tasked with ensuring compliance and others reported that they conduct audits or 
audit-type reviews of applications to identify instances of noncompliance.  Several 
agencies reported making site visits to monitor compliance and issue violation letters 
upon finding noncompliance . One agency reported that it issues a quarterly 
newsletter alerting the agency of fraud risks , and others utilize data analytics to 
identify instances of noncompliance or risk.  
 
D. Agency Self-Assessment of Complexity, Risk, and Integrity Controls 
 
1. Application Complexities   
 
The Questionnaire asked agencies to self -evaluate potential complexities 
inherent in the applications for their programs and services. Some factors that may 
contribute to or be indicative of complexity are a large number of requirements or 
tasks that the a pplicant must comply with or complete; long instructions preceding 
the application; required submission of multiple documents; the need to utilize 
technical systems, application portals, or websites to complete or submit applications; 
a high number of applications submitted improperly or incompletely; and/or the need 
for an applicant to consult with a third-party in order to comply with requirements 
or complete application tasks. 
 
 Thirty agencies provided a response to this question. Of those, seven agencies 
specifically stated that they have complicated application processes. The most 
frequently cited reasons for complexity were the involvement of multiple agencies or 
departments in reviewing or approving applications or in providing the necessary 
documentation to complete an application, the lack of an online submission option or 
a confusing online portal, the quantity of supporting documentation required, 
confusion caused by the underlying laws and regulations that govern the application, 
and indiv idual circumstances of the applicant (i.e. literacy or language barriers, 
unstable housing or family situations, criminal history, or outstanding municipal 
debt). 
 
Many agencies pointed to the highly technical nature of the approval or benefit 
being sought as a reason for the difficulty of the application or the need for significant 
amounts of supporting documentation. At least two agencies reported that the 
application process was so complicated and technical as to require the assistance of a 
third-party s ubject matter expert to guide the applicant through the process.  
Numerous agencies reported that incomplete or incorrect applications are frequently 
submitted. 
 
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
11 
 
 The Questionnaire asked whether agencies track complaints from the public 
about their regulatory processes or programs, because those complaints may reveal 
burdens or complexities within the process. Only 17 (33.3%) of the agencies that 
responded to the questionnaire answered in the affirmative. In terms of complaint 
volume reported by the agencies , the number of complaints received by individual 
agencies about a particular application process ranged from the single digits to the 
thousands. 
 
 Some agencies informed DOI that they have taken measures to clarify aspects 
of the application process and reduce its complexity or  that they have implemented 
safeguards to prevent the submission of incomplete applications.  Several agencies 
reported that they have a function  that prevents applicants from submitting  an 
application if any required documentation is missing . Others said they publish 
extensive tutorials and guidance on how to complete the application  or train their 
employees to help applicants with the process. At least one agency reported that the 
use o f new technology has alleviated some of the complexity and difficulties 
associated with submitting applications.   
2. Risks of Corruption in Application and Determination Processes   
DOI asked the agencies to discuss risks that individuals or entities may engage 
in corrupt or criminal activity (e.g. bribes, falsification of documents, etc.) or 
noncompliance with rules in an effort to avoid burdens, costs, or complexities of 
application or determination  processes.  Twenty -four agencies identified and 
discussed a risk, while seven  reported that there was little to no risk or reason to 
believe that corruption might occur during their application or determination 
processes.  
 
The vast majority of respondents identified the risk of document falsification  
or alterat ion as a potential corruption issue.  Many agencies also suggested that 
applicants might misrepresent their circumstances (i.e. under-report income or crowd 
size of an event) in order to meet eligibility criteria for the approval  sought. Some 
agencies expressed that these risks could be heightened because they had insufficient 
staff to conduct the fraud screening or inspections that they would like to do in order 
to detect these issues. One agency stated that their inability to conduct automatic 
income verification from other agencies that may possess verified information made 
it more challenging to detect fraud or misrepresentation of reported income levels. 
 
Other risks identified were the potential for bribery during the inspection or 
application review process. Agencies also expressed a concern that individuals may 
engage in activity without required licenses or permits to avoid a difficult application 
process or due to the risk that they might not receive the necessary permission due 
to caps on license or permit numbers. At least one agency said that the reliance on an 
application expeditor (a third-party who works to facilitate quicker processing of an 
application for an applicant) could be a potential risk because the expeditor could be 
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
12 
 
motivated to commit fraud in order to obtain a shorter processing time than would be 
possible using legitimate means . According to some agencies, if the applicant faces 
burdensome application process with significant  requirements, or is flagged for 
regulatory violations at a business that might negatively impact customer 
perceptions, the applicant may seek to avoid the application process and/or to evade 
regulation or enforcement.  
  
Several agencies pointed to systems that they have in place to prevent these 
risks. For example, some reported that they  have extensive quality assurance 
systems to detect fraudulent responses  on applications  or forge documents.  One 
agency noted that laws permitting applicants to re-apply for public services following 
a rejected application, without disclosing the basis for the rejection, make it more 
difficult to disincentivize fraud in the application process.  
 
3. Risks of Corruption in Compliance and Enforcement  
 
In addition to risks of corruption in the application and determination process, 
DOI asked about risks in the compliance and enforcement sphere.  Twenty agencies 
responded in the affirmative when asked  if, in the agency’s opinion and experience, 
any of their compliance or enforcement programs or activities pose a risk that 
individuals or entities may engage in corrupt or criminal activity (e.g. bribery, 
falsification of documents, etc.) or noncompliance with rules, in an effort to avoid 
potential compliance or enforcement actions (e.g. an individual who is faced wi th an 
enforcement action seeks to pay a bribe in exchange for an inspector or other agency 
official forgoing an enforcement action.) I n other words, DOI sought to understand 
whether agencies’ compliance or enforcement programs could increase the motivation 
to commit fraud. 
 
With respect to compliance and enforcement, the primary risk identified by the 
agencies was the risk of bribery, for example, of an inspector , to avoid a fine or 
citation. Like in the application and determination process, the submission of 
fraudulent documents or testimony to falsely demonstrate compliance was 
highlighted as a potential risk.  Some a gencies reported  steps that they had 
implemented to mitigate these risks. Examples include training specifically for 
inspection staff,  the rotation of inspectors  to prevent over-familiarity between 
inspectors and inspected, the use of internal audits to review inspection results, and 
other integrity controls.   
4. Training, Integrity Controls, and Other Anti-Corruption Tools   
The Questionnaire asked agencies to describe any relevant training, integrity 
controls, or other anti-corruption tools put in place to prevent opportunities for fraud 
or corruption with respect to the application and determination processes , and 
compliance and enforcement activities identified in the Questionnaire. Thirty 
agencies responded to this question. Among them, employee training was the means 
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
13 
 
most commonly used to prevent fraud and corruption. Seventeen agencies said they 
rely on various trainings, such as from the New York Conflicts of Interest Board and 
internal sources, while  11 agencies reported they rely on DOI ’s anti-corruption 
trainings. Most agencies said their traini ngs were mandated ; at least one agency 
reported training was voluntary.   
 
 For non-training related integrity controls, eight  agencies reported that they 
use a multi-layered review process to make determinations on applications as a way 
to prevent and detect fraud or corruption . Specifically, the agencies said that they 
require a supervisor or multiple supervisors to approve determinations with respect 
to the application. At least two agencies said that technological advances , such as 
online application portals , assisted with their efforts in  preventing fraud and 
corruption. Two agencies said they have internal investigation teams that are meant 
to assist with preventing corruption and fraud, and two other agencies specifically  
said they work very closely with DOI to help prevent fraud and corruption. Other 
reported tools include not allowing inspectors to do follow-up inspections at the same 
inspection location, random assignment of inspectors and inspections, notices posted 
in the workplace about the penalties of committing fraud, quality control and 
validations built into workflows, field inspections, and subpoenas to third-parties for 
original documents (i.e. electric bills) to detect fraudulent submissions. 
 
5. Reform Recommendations  
 
 DOI asked agencies to suggest possible reforms – operational, regulatory, 
legislative, and shifts in resources or priorities – to address corruption or 
noncompliance risks posed by potentially complex, burdensome, or costly regulations 
and processes. The Questionnaire also asked if increased or different staffing for any 
of the programs associated with the applications listed in the agencies’ responses to 
the Questionnaire could mitigate corruption or noncompliance risks. 
 
Sixteen agencies offered suggestions for reform  including resources for 
additional staffing; proposed changes in burdensome, confusing, or unnecessary laws, 
rules, or regulations ; and technology changes, including moving  applications to an 
online platform. At least one agency sug gested leveraging data matching 
opportunities across databases and agencies to verify information provided by 
applicants.  
 
Of the agencies that process applications for licenses, permits, certifications, 
grants, and/or registrations, or other similar types of programs, or public benefits, 
the responses were evenly split as to whether staffing increases or changes would 
help mitigate corruption risks. Of the agencies that said that staffing changes would 
help, seven reported that increased staffing would help with the timeliness of their 
application reviews, to the extent timeliness of review could impact potential 
corruption, or allow for more robust c ustomer service to assist with submission and 
2024 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
14 
 
completion of applications. Several agencies said that additional staff would increase 
their capacities for monitoring and enforcement and that additional staff is needed 
for oversight, audit, and fraud detection and prevention duties.   
 
IV. Conclusion 
 
Municipal regulations serve critical purposes such as protecting public health 
and safety, promoting fairness, and ensuring  conservation of the City’s  limited 
resources and the appropriate use of those resources to serve those in greatest need . 
However, the systems and processes designed to implement these regulations must 
be carefully calibrated. When mechanisms intended to ensure compliance are overly 
complex, burdenso me, or opaque, they can inadvertently create conditions that 
increase the risk of fraud. Excessively rigid or inefficient regulatory frameworks may 
motivate members of the public to engage in fraudulent behavior to avoid delays or 
laborious processes , to seek to circumvent the  regulatory process entirely, and to 
rationalize corrupt and illegal behavior as a necessary means to an end. Therefore, 
in designing and administering regulatory programs and application and 
enforcement processes, the City’s agencies should ensure that the rules are robust 
enough to achieve their intended purposes without imposing such disproportionate 
burdens that they inadvertently increase the risk of fraud. Ongoing evaluation and 
thoughtful design of application and compliance processes are key to mitigating these 
risks while maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of the regulations.
 