TITLE: CBC Recommends Voting Yes on November Ballot Questions 2, 3, 4, and 5 to Boost Housing Production in New York
URL: https://cbcny.org/advocacy/cbc-recommends-voting-yes-november-ballot-questions-2-3-4-and-5-boost-housing-production
ISSUED: 2025-09-11
PDF: https://cbcny.org/sites/default/files/media/files/CBCREPORT_CRC_09112025_0.pdf

REPORT  HOUSING
CBC Recommends Voting Yes on November Ballot Questions 2, 3, 4, and 5 to Boost Housing Production in New York
Download Report
Print
Share
EXPAND TABLE OF CONTENTS
September 11, 2025

New York City has a dire housing shortage, burdening too many New Yorkers with ever-higher rents and home prices. People looking to move to or within New York City cannot find an apartment they can afford.

The Citizens Budget Commission (CBC) commends the work of the NYC Charter Revision Commission (CRC). The CRC proposed three ballot questions that will improve New York City’s land use decision-making process and one that will modernize administration of the City Map. These would meaningfully improve the land use review process and could boost housing production throughout the city.

CBC recommends New Yorkers vote:

Yes on Question 2, which would create fast track reviews for affordable housing through the Board of Standards and Appeals (BSA) and for mixed-income residential projects in the neighborhoods that produce the least affordable housing;
Yes on Question 3, which would create an Expedited Land Use Review Procedure (ELURP) for three types of zoning proposals;
Yes on Question 4, which would create an Affordable Housing Appeals Board; and
Yes on Question 5, which would modernize the administration of the City Map. 

New York City’s land use decision-making process has too often been an impediment to robust housing production and limited the City’s ability to spur job growth and become more resilient and sustainable.

CBC has found the City’s land use process is:

Too long, with private rezoning application approval taking between 2 to 3 years; 
Too expensive, adding as much as $82,000 to the cost of each housing unit in 2025 dollars; 
Too uncertain, with little assurance that even a well-conceived application will get approved; and 
Too discouraging, keeping projects from getting proposed at all.

CBC had recommended that the CRC proposals go even further by also speeding up non-housing projects and by exempting the myriad administrative actions that remain subject to the City’s Uniform Land Use Review Procedure (ULURP). More changes at both the City and State levels are needed to solve New York City’s housing and affordability crises.

Background on Proposals

Question 2 would create fast track reviews for a subset of affordable housing projects via the BSA and for residential projects in the neighborhoods that produce the least affordable housing through a new Affordable Housing Fast Track.

The Affordable Housing Fast Track would speed up production in the 12 Community Districts that permitted the least affordable housing over the preceding five years. Property owners in these neighborhoods would be able to apply for streamlined rezonings for projects that provide affordable housing under the City’s Mandatory Inclusionary Housing program. The expedited process would have 60-day concurrent advisory reviews by the Community Board and Borough President, followed by a binding vote of the City Planning Commission (CPC), which would have 30 days to act. 

The Affordable Housing Fast Track would help ensure that all city neighborhoods meaningfully contribute to solving the housing crisis. This crisis is a citywide issue, but for too long some neighborhoods have been allowed to opt out of growth. New housing development has been concentrated in just a few neighborhoods. The Affordable Housing Fast Track could meaningfully boost production in neighborhoods that currently produce new housing at some of the slowest rates in the country.  

This underproduction is partly due to previously approved “downzonings” that effectively have blocked the development of new multifamily housing at the behest of neighborhoods resistant to change. The culture of member deference, in which the City Council defers to the wishes of the local Council Member on rezoning applications, has made it nearly impossible to increase density in these downzoned neighborhoods. Too often, beneficial projects simply do not get proposed at all if a property owner knows that the local Council Member is opposed to new development. 

The Fast Track maintains the Community Board and Borough Presidents’ important roles in the land use process but allows the final decision to be made by the CPC. CPC is best structured to balance citywide needs with neighborhood concerns and ensure that residents of all neighborhoods benefit from increased housing production. 

Question 3 would create an Expedited Land Use Review Procedure (ELURP) for three types of zoning proposals: residential projects that require modest increases in density; acquisition and disposition of City-owned land and City Map changes for affordable housing projects; and for a variety of infrastructure and resiliency actions that require public approval.  

ELURP would require concurrent 60-day reviews from the Community Board and Borough President, followed by a binding vote of CPC, which would have 30 days to act. 

For residential projects, ELURP would be available only for modest increases in density for properties in already residentially zoned areas.  In low density residential districts, ELURP would apply to projects of up to 45 feet in height and a maximum residential floor-to-area ratio of 2.0. In medium- and high-density districts, it would allow up to a 30 percent increase in residential capacity. In both cases, this would allow development that is consistent with, but only slightly denser than what would be allowed under current zoning.

CBC’s research has found that the time, cost, and uncertainty of the land use process mean that only developers of large projects are willing and able to take on the risk of ULURP. The ELURP process would be an attractive review avenue for the modest projects that almost never seek zoning changes through ULURP today. ELURP would significantly reduce both cost and uncertainty associated with the rezoning process by cutting the review time in half and removing the risk associated with member deference, while still ensuring local concerns are still heard through Borough President and Community Board reviews. 

ELURP also would build on the previous Green Fast Track environmental review streamlining. Together, ELURP and Green Fast Track would reduce the cost of development by hundreds of thousands, if not millions of dollars per project.

Question 4 would create an Affordable Housing Appeals Board. This proposal would create an appeals board as the final step, if chosen, of the ULURP process residential projects with affordable housing located in one borough. A board consisting of the Mayor, City Council Speaker, and Borough President would be able to overturn a Council disapproval or modification by a two-thirds vote. 

Adding an appeals process to ULURP would maintain the important role of the City Council in the land use decision-making process, while encouraging greater balance of citywide needs and neighborhood concerns. The City Council’s tradition of member deference has sometimes resulted in local concerns, especially local resistance to development, overriding citywide need to build more housing for everyone in all neighborhoods. 

The appeal process might encourage the City Council to bring more projects to a vote rather than allow them to be withdrawn in the face of defeat due to member deference. More projects coming to a vote at the City Council could encourage more applications to come forward, since in some cases, well-considered projects are never proposed due to member deference.

Question 5 would modernize the administration of the City Map. 

The CRC has proposed requiring the City Map be digitized and transferring administration from the Borough Presidents to the Department of City Planning. These changes would increase the efficiency and cost effectiveness of government operations. 

The City Map is the official registry of streets and publicly owned land. Despite significant advances in technology, the City Map remains stuck in the pre-digital era: The Map is over 8,000 individual paper maps administered by the offices of the five Borough Presidents. This change would reduce the time needed to amend the map from months to days, significantly speeding up the time needed to advance both public and private projects that involve changes to the public realm. 

By Sean Campion

Director of Housing and Economic Development Studies
Download Report
CBC Recommends Voting Yes on November Ballot Questions 2, 3, 4, and 5 to Boost Housing Production (179.1 KB)