TITLE: NYC Budget Blueprint
URL: https://cbcny.org/research/nyc-budget-blueprint
ISSUED: 2025-11-12
PDF: https://cbcny.org/sites/default/files/media/files/CBCREPORT_Smart-Choices-Blueprint_11122025_0.pdf

REPORT  CITY BUDGET
NYC Budget Blueprint
9 Smart Choices to Improve Stability, Preparedness, and Services
Press Release
Download Report
Print
Share
EXPAND TABLE OF CONTENTS
November 12, 2025
Contents
Executive Summary
Introduction
Nine Smart Choices to Improve Fiscal Stability, Preparedness, and Services
Conclusion
Appendix A: FY 2027 NYC Underbudgeting and Restated Gap as of the FY 2026 Adopted Budget, by Fiscal Monitor

 

Executive Summary

The promises of campaigning will turn starkly to the practicalities of governing when Mayor Zohran Mamdani proposes his first preliminary budget just one month into his term.

He will want to make progress on his priorities but will also have to close a $6 billion to $8 billion budget gap and prepare for federal cuts. The task is formidable, but nine smart choices that blend fiscal discipline with fervent management will help deliver a better future for all New Yorkers.

Make no mistake: The City’s choices created this budget gap. Spending has grown to unsustainable levels. This is partly masked by chronic underbudgeting for known expenses; the City’s projections understate fiscal year 2027 spending by $4.5 billion by CBC’s estimate. Over the past three fiscal years, the City spent $2.3 billion more than it took in, a choice only made possible by using money saved from the financial services-driven revenue surge during the pandemic.

Dramatic federal policy and budget changes already enacted will reduce aid to the City and cut support high-need New Yorkers receive directly. Likely additional cuts and cost shifts in housing, education, and public health would further strain the City’s budget.

The next recession is inevitable; the City is unprepared. It would need $14.0 billion to cover two years of tax revenue declines, but its Rainy Day Fund only has $2.0 billion. Nobody should be under the illusion that the federal government would come to the rescue like it did in prior recessions.

Last, only 11 percent of New Yorkers believe the City spends their tax dollars wisely and just 27 percent say services are good or excellent. Despite spending growth well exceeding inflation over the past decade, the City is not delivering the high-quality services New Yorkers need or expect.

While significant, these challenges can be overcome by disciplined financial and service management built on clear priorities and effective implementation. Here’s how:

Show Us the Money—Present Accurate Expenditure and Revenue Estimates

Credible estimates are not just numbers. They are the foundation of wise decisions about priorities and a cornerstone of public trust. On day one (or before!) Mayor-elect Mamdani should work with the Office of Management and Budget to identify the City's total spending obligations, how much revenue is available, and the risks.

Prioritize High Impact Services and Shrink Others

Not all services deliver the same bang for their buck. The Mamdani Administration should identify the impact and cost-effectiveness of each service, preserve what works well, and cut or shrink what does not, even if popular.

Relentlessly Manage Performance Citywide

The Administration should launch a citywide Performance Management System, similar to CompStat, to deliver the efficient high-quality services New Yorkers deserve. Data-driven accountability and problem solving should improve services and drive budget decisions.

PEG for Quality, Efficiency, and Stability—Reduce Spending Growth the Right Way

The Administration should implement a savings plan that streamlines operations, reduces duplication, phases out lower-impact programs, leverages technology to automate manual processes, and increases productivity in collaboration with labor unions. Service quality need not be compromised.

Streamline Hiring and Align Headcount with Need

Shift from a siloed to a flexible agencywide approach to allocate vacant positions. Don’t just keep vacancies where they were; shift them across agencies and units based on need while eliminating those in excess. Then get out of agencies' way to let them quickly hire staff they need.

Hold the Line on Taxes

The City’s high-income residents and businesses already pay nation-leading taxes; increasing them makes the city less attractive to both. Managed well, the City's $120 billion budget should be more than enough to deliver progress on the Administration’s priorities and services that improve New Yorkers’ quality of life.

Prepare for Federal Cuts and Cost Shifts to Protect Vulnerable New Yorkers

Federal policy changes will weaken programs supporting low-income New Yorkers and have ripple effects across the economy. In response, the City should realign its own funds to improve affordability, serve the neediest New Yorkers, and maintain competitiveness. While taking essential actions, the Administration should preserve resources and flexibility to protect New Yorkers from additional federal cuts by increasing the general reserve by $1 billion per year.

Shore up the Rainy Day Fund to Protect New Yorkers during the Next Recession

The Administration should add to the fund while revenues are strong, and work with City Council to pass a law setting the fund's target size, requiring deposits during economic expansions and restricting withdrawals to recessions and emergencies. The City should not use the Rainy Day Fund to mitigate federal actions, which would leave New Yorkers, especially those in need, vulnerable to an economic downturn.

Leverage Collective Bargaining to Improve Efficiency and Increase Wages

The Mayor should pursue a collaborative relationship with labor that recognizes their shared interest in a thriving city and a sustainable, efficient municipal government that provides good careers for its employees. Fiscal benefits from increased efficiency can be shared to fund otherwise unaffordable raises, while bringing City spending in line with revenues.

New York City’s challenges are serious but solvable. By shoring up the fiscal house, grounding decisions in credible data, focusing resources on what works, and managing performance relentlessly, the Mamdani Administration can improve affordability and quality of life for residents, enhance City services, and stabilize the budget to protect New Yorkers’ future.

Introduction

The incoming Mamdani Administration faces three intertwined challenges: restoring fiscal stability, preparing for federal impacts and the next recession, and improving services. With the Fiscal Year 2027 Preliminary Budget due February 1, 2026, the Mayor-elect Mamdani will have just one month after inauguration to propose a plan that closes a projected $6 billion to $8 billion budget gap, meets these challenges, and starts to deliver on campaign promises.

This will require choices. New York City spending has grown to an unsustainable level, which is partly masked by the City’s obfuscatory practice of underbudgeting for planned spending by billions of dollars. Additionally, inadequate preparation has left the City more vulnerable than necessary not only to the next recession, but to federal policy changes that will reduce New Yorkers’ benefits, cut aid, and shift costs to the City.

Furthermore, the quality of many City services has declined in recent years. The Citizens Budget Commission’s 2025 Straight from New Yorkers resident feedback survey and numerous Mayor’s Management Report (MMR) indicators show a notable decline in service quality, from processing public assistance applications to scheduling construction inspections.1

To meet the intertwined challenges and deliver progress on promises, the incoming administration should make nine smart choices that would stabilize the budget, improve services, and prepare the City for federal changes and a recession:

Show us the money—present accurate expenditure and revenue estimates;
Prioritize high impact services and shrink others;
Relentlessly manage performance citywide;
PEG for quality, efficiency, and stability—implement a savings plan to align spending and revenues;
Streamline hiring and align headcount with need;
Hold the line on taxes;
Prepare for federal cuts and cost shifts to protect New York’s most vulnerable;
Shore up the rainy day fund to serve the neediest New Yorkers during the next recession;
and
Leverage collective bargaining to improve efficiency and increase wages.
The Budget is Opaque, Precarious, and Unprepared

New York City’s finances may not seem fragile on paper, with a $5 billion fiscal year 2027 budget gap that could be termed ‘manageable’ given strong revenues and the unallocated general reserve. However, the magnitude of the fiscal problem is obscured because the City did not budget enough money to pay for its true spending obligations.

The City used revenue generated by the financial industry surge during the pandemic to balloon spending to a level that the City’s recurring revenues cannot sustain. This choice came at the expense of using the funds to build reserves.
Now the City’s resources are woefully inadequate both to weather a recession and support future spending. Compounding this, dramatic federal policy and budget changes will reduce aid to the City and to high-need New Yorkers directly. The City and State are insufficiently prepared to respond to these changes, now and for the months and years to come.

Substantial Underbudgeting and Gaps

Underbudgeting has exploded in recent years. The City knowingly underfunds overtime, housing vouchers, public assistance, homeless shelters, and other programs. As a result, the City’s projections understate fiscal year 2027 spending by $4.5 billion by CBC’s estimate, and by as much as $5.1 billion and $5.4 billion, according to the City and State Comptrollers. (See Table 1.)

CBC estimates that Mayor Mamdani will face a fiscal year 2027 gap ranging from $6.1 billion to $8.5 billion, after accounting for underbudgeting, in-year reserves, and potentially higher-than-forecast revenue.

Unsustainable Spending

City-funded spending—which excludes State and federal funding—has ballooned to an unsustainable level. It’s $13.5 billion higher than it would be if the budget grown at the rate of inflation since fiscal year 2017. This level is so high that the City needed to use revenues it saved from the financial services-driven revenue surge to support spending obligations.2 Annual expenses exceeded annual revenues by a cumulative $2.3 billion over the past three fiscal years: $637 million in fiscal year 2023, $1.1 billion in fiscal year 2024, and $610 million in fiscal year 2025.

Unprepared for a Recession or Federal Changes

The City’s fiscal fragility is compounded because it has not adequately prepared for a recession or federal changes. The City will likely be on its own to weather the next recession, which is inevitable even if its timing is uncertain. Based on the 2001 and 2008 recessions, the City would need $14.0 billion over two years to cover tax revenue losses and modest 2 percent annual spending growth. Yet the Revenue Stabilization Fund, the City’s rainy day fund, has a balance of just $2.0 billion. The City cannot assume it will receive the level of federal assistance it did during the pandemic and Great Recession, and the State’s own fiscal house of cards makes it unlikely to have resources to aid the City.

Enacted federal policy changes shrink safety net programs like Medicaid and food assistance, cut federal aid, and shift federal costs to state and local governments. The federal government is likely to adopt additional changes to housing, education, and public health funding. Unknown as the full picture of these cuts and changes are, they will clearly strain the City’s and State’s budgets.

In addition, the City faces cost pressures within its own plan. For example, the budget assumes annual raises of just 1.25 percent a year for the next round of collective bargaining; agreements like those negotiated over the last 20 years would require more spending than is in the budget currently.3 The budget also does not include the cost of phasing out the jails at Rikers Island and transitioning to four newly constructed borough-based jails.

Nine Smart Choices to Improve Fiscal Stability, Preparedness, and Services

While significant, these challenges can be overcome by disciplined financial and service management built on clear priorities and effective implementation.

Following CBC’s Budget Blueprint will allow the incoming administration to stabilize finances, improve the quality and efficiency of services, and prepare the City for federal and economic headwinds, while creating the solid fiscal foundation to deliver progress to New Yorkers.

1. Show Us the Money—Present Accurate Expenditure and Revenue Estimates

A sustainable budget begins with clear, accurate estimates of both spending and revenue. Credible estimates are the foundation of good, forward-looking decisions about priorities and trade-offs. They build the public’s trust, without which smart trade-offs are even harder.

The next administration should present a full and realistic accounting of revenues and expenses. On day one, and before inauguration if possible, Mayor-elect Mamdani should work with the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to understand the City’s complete expenditure obligations, how much revenue is available to pay for them, and what the risks are to each estimate.

Specifically, the administration should:

Stop underbudgeting. The preliminary budget should reflect the full cost of expected services and activities, including homeless services, rental assistance, uniformed overtime, and MTA subsidies.
Present reasonable revenue forecasts. The City should use prudent, reasonable revenue forecasts that reflect today’s economic uncertainty without intentionally low-balling revenue estimates to keep dollars off the table. Conversely, forecasts should not be optimistic, since revenue shortfalls can require immediate and damaging cuts.
2. Prioritize High Impact Services and Shrink Others

Not all services deliver the same bang for the buck. The next administration should identify the impact and cost-effectiveness of each service, preserve what works well, and shrink what does not, even if it is popular. This goes for existing services and new priorities. Each administration brings in its priorities but often adds them on top of existing City services without shrinking what has been done in the past.

3. Relentlessly Manage Performance Citywide

New Yorkers are dissatisfied with how the City spends their money. Only 11 percent believe the City spends their tax dollars wisely and just 27 percent say services are good or excellent. It’s no wonder, given that the City spends billions of dollars without knowing whether they deliver the outcomes New Yorkers need and expect.

The incoming administration should implement a Performance Management System that improves service quality and efficiency and drives budget decisions. While notable efforts like NYPD’s CompStat exist, the City lacks a comprehensive management system.

Performance management is more than cherry-picked data. From City Hall to the front lines, the administration should implement a system where leaders and managers regularly review data on quality, efficiency, and outcomes together to identify what works, fix or shrink what does not, and guide spending. This process would leverage metrics to drive meaningful results and ensure every dollar delivers value for New Yorkers.

For example, the Mayor’s Management Report already points to areas ripe for improvement. The City should:

Fill affordable housing units faster. In fiscal year 2025, it took nearly 5 months to fill an affordable housing lottery unit.4
Reduce ambulance wait times. The end-to-end ambulance response time to life-threatening medical emergencies increased from 9 min and 34 seconds in fiscal year 2021 to 11 minutes and 21 seconds in fiscal year 2025.5
Speed up the processing of cash assistance applications. Only 63.2 percent of cash assistance applications were on time in fiscal year 2025, far below the average rate of 95.7 achieved between fiscal years 2016 and 2021.6
Reduce wait times for building inspections. Wait times for construction, electrical, and plumbing inspections in fiscal year 2025 were at least twice as long as in fiscal year 2019.7 
4. PEG for Quality, Efficiency, and Stability—Reduce Spending Growth the Right Way

The City needs to rein in spending growth to align recurring spending with revenue, reduce budget gaps, prepare for federal changes, and free up resources for the incoming administration’s priorities.

The Mamdani Administration should immediately launch a Program to Eliminate the Gap (PEG). But this PEG should not be a blunt, blind, across-the-board whack. It should be a data-driven prioritization effort focused on streamlining operations, reducing duplication, phasing out lower-impact programs, leveraging technology to automate manual processes, and increasing productivity in negotiation with labor unions. The administration should develop and phase in PEG savings over multiple financial plans.

This should be grounded in a robust analysis of service quality, efficiency, and impact. The City should leverage data—and the Performance Management System— to identify where and how to reduce spending without compromising service quality. The new administration should review where need for services has declined, where per-unit or per-person costs have increased rapidly, where services are underutilized, and where outcomes demonstrate programs have insufficient impact. For example:

Public school enrollment has declined 13 percent since school year 2015-16 and is projected to decline further. Funding has not followed suit;
The cost per ton of recycling collected increased from $668 to $805 between fiscal years 2019 and 2024, and;
40 percent of contracted infant/toddler day care slots were unfilled in fiscal year 2025.

Embracing technology can transform how government works, not simply increase efficiency. Automation frees staff to elevate problem-solving and public engagement, while giving New Yorkers a more seamless, modern experience with government.

The PEG program should leverage technology to improve service efficiency and quality. Robust newer technologies should replace outdated, manual processes that slow service and waste resources.

City managers and labor unions should work together to identify work rules that constrain operations and can be modernized or eliminated to increase efficiency. For example, fixed shift lengths and inflexible sanitation routes hamper DSNY’s ability to optimize curbside refuse and recycling collection, which would increase productivity and reduce costs. As fewer needed routes reduce costs, savings could be shared with workers through higher wages or in some cases, differentials.

5. Streamline Hiring and Align Headcount with Need

City employees are the government’s greatest resource, yet local government’s hiring and staff allocation systems are slow, impede hiring the best and brightest, and do not allow vacant positions to be moved where they are most needed to deliver services.

Rather than manage vacancies within siloed agencies, the new administration should shift vacant positions across agencies and units based on needs and eliminate excess vacancies. As of June 2025, the City had 19,302 full time and “full-time equivalent” vacant positions, not all of which are allocated where they are most needed.8 Many would not be needed if the City systems were flexible enough to reallocate vacancies. Taking this flexible, government-wide approach would help right-size headcount and focus resources where they are most needed.

The new administration should improve recruitment and hiring systems, and fill vacant positions much more quickly. Offices both inside and outside of the hiring agency overly control the hiring process, from posting open positions, to making offers, approving salary levels, and setting start dates. This slows the process. The City should also give civil service tests and call lists more quickly to speed up hiring and encourage top applicants to seek City employment.

6. Hold the Line on Taxes

New York City’s high-income residents and businesses already pay nation-leading taxes. Increasing tax rates makes the City less attractive to both. The City’s already-ballooned $120 billion budget should be sufficient to provide high-impact services and deliver progress on Mayor-elect Mamdani’s agenda and New Yorkers’ needs.

New York State and its localities have the highest taxes in the nation.9 The City’s top earners face the nation’s highest top marginal personal income tax rates: Combined State and City income tax rates range from 13.5 percent to nearly 14.8 percent for households with adjusted gross income greater than $2.2 million.10 Furthermore, between 2010 and 2022, New York City’s share of the nation’s millionaires shrunk from 6.5 percent to 4.2 percent. Had it stayed constant, the City would have received an additional $2.5 billion in revenue in tax year 2022 alone. Raising income taxes further risks accelerating this trend—shrinking the tax base, straining remaining residents, and undermining the City’s long-term vitality.

Similarly, companies doing business in New York City pay not only the State corporate franchise tax, but also the City’s corporate income tax and an MTA-region corporate tax surcharge. Together, the top combined marginal rate is 17.44 percent, made up of the 8.85 percent City rate, 6.61 percent State effective rate, and 1.98 effective rate for the MTA surcharge.11 The new administration should signal that NYC is open for business by keeping corporate rates where they are and seeking additional regulatory reforms.

7. Prepare for Federal Cuts and Cost Shifts to Protect New York’s Most Vulnerable

Federal actions will significantly affect programs supporting low-income New Yorkers, like Medicaid, housing assistance, SNAP, and WIC. These programs don’t just face one threat but an overlapping system of threats: a reduction in aid to New Yorkers themselves, a reduction in aid to City government, and the transference of costs to City and State.

Impacts will not only be direct funding cuts, but second- and third-order consequences as well. The loss of health insurance, for example, can lead to deferred care, more uncompensated care at safety net hospitals, and ultimately, negative health outcomes. Maintaining the most critical services amid these changes requires choices, vigilance, coordination, and disciplined management.

The Mamdani Administration should proactively prepare. Specifically, the City should:

Prioritize existing programs that cost-effectively improve quality of life and affordability, provide essential services to the neediest New Yorkers, and maintain New York’s competitiveness;
Align resources according to those priorities to ensure that critical services are funded;
Diligently manage to mitigate some negative effects, for example:
Reduce Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) cost-shifts by lowering the administrative error rate. Bringing the error rate back to its historical range of 6 percent to 8 percent would reduce the statewide cost shift by $787 million a year compared to the cost shift if the error rate remains above 10 percent; and12
Effectively and fairly administer work requirements and eligibility checks for SNAP and Medicaid to protect benefits for those who qualify while minimizing errors and misuse.
Increase the General Reserve by $1 billion a year, from $1.25 billion to $2.25 billion, to strengthen the City’s ability to absorb the initial impact of unexpected cuts or delays in federal aid, helping critical services remain intact even during fiscal turbulence;
Restrict rainy day fund use to a recession and not to temporarily backfill recurring federal cuts;
Take essential action, while preserving resources and flexibility to mitigate additional changes that will unfold over the coming months and years; and
Monitor State actions and coordinate response to ensure smooth programmatic integration and prevent unfunded cost shifts. 
8. Shore up the Rainy Day Fund to Protect New Yorkers during the Next Recession

The City’s financial cushion is dangerously thin. The Revenue Stabilization Fund (RSF)—often called the Rainy Day Fund—exists to mitigate crises. New York City’s RSF has only $2.0 billion, leaving the City ill-prepared for the next downturn. A typical recession would erase roughly $15 billion to $20 billion in revenues over three years, yet the City has not made a single deposit since fiscal year 2022—even when tax revenues grew 6.2 percent in fiscal year 2022 and 8.3 percent in fiscal year 2025.13

The incoming administration should grow the fund when revenues are strong, before a downturn makes it too late. It should work with the City Council to pass a Local Law to strengthen the RSF by requiring deposits during economic expansions, restricting withdrawals to a recession or severe emergency, and setting the fund’s target size. CBC recommends:

Mandatory deposits equal to 75 percent of any tax revenue growth above 3 percent;
Withdrawals restricted to an economic contraction, with the definition and economic metrics defined in law, or a severe emergency with a significant, unanticipated revenue loss or expenditure needs; and
Target size of 17.2 percent of tax revenues, based on revenue losses following the 2001 and 2008 recessions.14
9. Leverage Collective Bargaining to Improve Efficiency and Increase Wages

Many impactful operational improvements require collaboration with labor.15 Some work rules in collective bargaining agreements date back decades and can limit the City’s ability to operate efficiently. The Mamdani Administration should pursue a collaborative relationship with labor that recognizes the shared interest in a thriving city and sustainable, effective, and efficient municipal government that provides good jobs and career paths for its employees.

The incoming administration should work with labor to share the fiscal benefits of increased efficiency to fund raises that otherwise may not be affordable, while bringing City spending in line with revenues. It should pursue a path to fund raises above those already in the City’s budget (labor reserve) by changing antiquated provisions within many of the 100-plus collective bargaining agreements, job titles, or other productivity measures.

Additionally, some savings can be generated by redesigning processes and leveraging technology. For example, automating parts of tax benefit application reviews can reduce the number of applications that require a full review by City employees. This would allow them to focus on more complex applications and would also accelerate turnaround for routine applications and renewals.

Conclusion

New York City is at a critical fiscal juncture. The Mamdani Administration will inherit not only a multi-billion-dollar budget gap, but also a government struggling to deliver the services that New Yorkers expect and deserve despite rapid spending increases over the last decade. Confronting these challenges will require candor about the City’s true fiscal condition, discipline in setting priorities, and a commitment to managing for results rather than simply spending more.

By following CBC’s Budget Blueprint, the new administration can put the City on a path toward fiscal stability and stronger public services. Transparent budgeting, performance-driven management, and strategic cost control can restore trust in government and deliver better outcomes for residents. Acting decisively now—before a crisis hits—will allow New York City to maintain essential services, invest in its future, and ensure long-term prosperity for all New Yorkers.

Related content
Straight from New Yorkers 2025
Straight from New Yorkers 2025
Competitive NYC: Value Proposition Tracker
The Hidden Cost of New York's Shrinking Millionaire Share
The Hidden Cost of New York’s Shrinking Millionaire Share

By Chris Henrichson

Director of City Studies

By Ana Champeny

Vice President for Research
Download Report
NYC Budget Blueprint: 9 Smart Choices to Improve Stability, Preparedness, and Services (1.18 MB)
Appendix
Footnotes
Ana Champeny, Straight from New Yorkers 2025 (Citizens Budget Commission, June 4, 2025), https://cbcny.org/research/straight-new-yorkers-2025 and City of New York, Mayor’s Office of Operations, Mayor’s Management Report: Fiscal Year 2025 (September 2025), nyc.gov/assets/ operations/downloads/pdf/mmr2025/2025_mmr.pdf.
CBC estimates fiscal year 2026 spending will increase 5.8 percent over fiscal year 2025 when accounting for $3 billion in expenses that are not included in the budget (i.e., “underbudgeted).
City of New York, Mayor’s Office of Management and Budget, Fiscal Year 2026 Executive Budget: Message
of the Mayor (May 1, 2025), https://www.nyc.gov/assets/omb/downloads/pdf/exec25/mm5-25.pdf.
City of New York, Mayor’s Office of Operations, Mayor’s Management Report: Fiscal Year 2025 (September 2025), nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/pdf/mmr2025/2025_mmr.pdf.
City of New York, Mayor’s Office of Operations, Mayor’s Management Report: Fiscal Year 2025 (September 2025), nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/pdf/mmr2025/2025_mmr.pdf.
City of New York, Mayor’s Office of Operations, Mayor’s Management Report: Fiscal Year 2025 (September 2025), nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/pdf/mmr2025/2025_mmr.pdf.
City of New York, Mayor’s Office of Operations, Mayor’s Management Report: Fiscal Year 2025 (September 2025), nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/pdf/mmr2025/2025_mmr.pdf.
City of New York, Mayor’s Office of Operations, Mayor’s Management Report: Fiscal Year 2025 (September 2025), nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/pdf/mmr2025/2025_mmr.pdf; and City of New York, Mayor's Office of Management and Budget, Fiscal Year 2026 Adopted Budget: Full-Time and Full-Time Equivalent Staffing Levels (June 30, 2025), https://www.nyc.gov/assets/omb/ downloads/pdf/adopt25/adopt25-stafflevels.pdf.
Adam Ciampaglio, New York, Still Top of the Charts (Citizens Budget Commission, January 9, 2025), https://cbcny.org/research/new-york-still-top-charts.
For marrying filing jointly. Ana Champeny, The Hidden Cost of New York’s Shrinking Millionaire Share (Citizens Budget Commission, August 28, 2025), https://cbcny.org/research/hidden-cost-new-yorks-shrinking-millionaire-share.
NYC Corporate Franchise Tax (CFT) is deductible from income sourced to NYS for the NYS CFT, which reduces the marginal State rate of 7.25% to an effective rate of 6.61%. The MTA surcharge is 30% of the State CFT liability for income sourced to the MTA region. City of New York, Department of Finance, “Business corporation tax” (accessed July 18, 2025), https://www.nyc.gov/site/finance/ business/business-corporation-tax.page; and State of New York, Department of Taxation and Finance, “CT-3-M_I: General Business Corporation MTA Surcharge Return 2024 - Instructions” (accessed July 18, 2025), https://www.tax.ny.gov/pdf/current_forms/ct/ct3mi.pdf.
Under H.R. 1, states will be responsible for a share of SNAP benefit costs between 0 percent and 15 percent depending on the State’s error rate; higher error rates will shift more benefit costs to the state. New York’s SNAP payment error rate was 14.1 percent in 2024, up from 6.3 percent in 2019.
Ana Champeny, NYC Revenues in a Recession (Citizens Budget Commission, February 26, 2019), https://cbcny.org/research/nyc-revenues-recession.
Government Finance Officers Association, “Fund Balance Guidelines for the General Fund” (accessed
March 28, 2019), www.gfoa.org/fund-balance-guidelines-general-fund.
Ana Champeny and Andrew Rein, Getting the Basics Right (Citizens Budget Commission, November 8, 2021), https://cbcny.org/research/getting-basics-right.