more 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
JOCELYN E. STRAUBER 
COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE Release #38-2025 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 25, 2025 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
  
DOI REPORT: INVESTIGATION FINDS CITY CORRECTION DEPARTMENT INVESTIGATOR VIOLATED 
NYC SANCTUARY CITY LAWS AND DOC POLICY BY PROVIDING INFORMATION 
ON TWO PERSONS IN CUSTODY TO FURTHER FEDERAL CIVIL IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT 
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Investigation (“DOI”), 
issued a Report following an investigation of allegations that officers from the City Department of Correction 
(“DOC”), assigned to a joint federal task force, provided assistance to Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement (“ICE”) agents in February 2025 in connection with the arrest of an individual in DOC custody 
who was believed to have entered the country illegally. DOI’s investigation found that an investigator 
assigned to the Homeland Security Investigations (“HSI”) Violent Gang Task Force did in fact provide that 
assistance, in violation of City law and DOC policy. DOI also uncovered a second incident where the same 
DOC investigator provided information to federal immigration authorities about another person in DOC 
custody, also in violation of City law and DOC policy. In both instances, the DOC investigator was not aware 
that the information provided to federal authorities was in furtherance of civil imm igration enforcement and 
thus impermissible, as opposed to in furtherance of a federal criminal investigation, which would have been 
consistent with local law  and DOC policy. DOI issued seven policy and procedure recommendations  
(“PPRs”) to DOC to strengthen DOC’s practices on how its staff responds to immigration- related requests 
and improve its training to staff regarding this important issue. DOI also recommended DOC conduct a 
department-wide audit to determine if there were other similar instances to the conduct uncovered in this 
Report. Because DOI notified DOC immediately upon learning of these violations, DOC already has 
implemented some of these recommendations.  A copy of the Report follows this release and can also be 
found at this link: https://www.nyc.gov/site/doi/newsroom/public-reports-current.page
  
  
DOI Commissioner Jocelyn E. Strauber said, “New York City law and DOC policy do not allow City 
resources to be used for the purpose of facilitating the enforcement of federal immigration law, and that 
prohibition includes the sharing of information with our federal law enforcement partners for that purpose. 
DOI found that in at least two instances a DOC investigator unwittingly violated the law and DOC policy and 
that DOC failed to provide proper guidance and training to DOC staff about how to comply with City law 
and DOC’s own policy while maintaining critical law enforcement partnerships with federal agencies. DOI’s 
seven recommendations, including that DOC should conduct a department-wide audit to identify any other 
similar violations to the ones uncovered in this Report , are intended to ensure that other breaches of the 
law do not occur.” 
 
  
   New York City  Local Laws and Mayoral Executive Orders , referred to as “Sanctuary City” laws, 
and City policies, limit how and when local officials can share information with immigration authorities about 
non-citizens in connection with the enforcement of federal civil immigration law. These laws and related 
policies restrict local authorities’ ability to share information about an individual's immigration status, bar 
local law enforcement from honoring ICE detainers, and prohibit C ity agencies from assisting with civil 
immigration enforcement  under certain circumstances. The Sanctuary City laws and policies seek to 

2 
 
encourage undocumented immigrants to report crimes, seek medical help, and access other essential 
services without fear of deportation. 
 
DOC, like other City agencies, has implemented policies that prohibit DOC employees from using 
City resources to assist federal authorities for federal immigration enforcement efforts. On February 5, 2025, 
a complainant reported to DOI that on February 3, 2025, DOC officers assigned to a joint federal task force 
assisted ICE agents with the arrest and apprehension of a per son in custody (“PIC”) upon the individual’s 
release from a City jail. The PIC, later identified as Cristian Concepcion, was believed to have entered the 
country illegally in violation of the Immigration and Nationality Act (“INA”). The complainant alleged that 
DOC officers informed ICE agents when the PIC would be released from custody and provided real time 
updates to the agents about his movements following his release from Rikers Island, so that ICE could take 
custody of him, in furtherance of civil immigration enforcement.     
 
 DOI’s investigation concluded that an investigator assigned to DOC Correction Intelligence Bureau 
(“CIB”) and HSI Violent Gang Task Force (“CIB Investigator A”) did in fact assist immigration authorities in 
the apprehension of Concepcion, as alleged by the complainant, in violation of New York City’s Sanctuary 
City l aws and DOC policy. While investigating that allegation, DOI also found that CIB Investigator A 
provided information to federal immigration authorities about another PIC, Pedro Mujica Villa Nueva, in 
furtherance of immigration enforcement . DOI determined that in both instances CIB Investigator A did not 
understand that the assistance he provided was in furtherance of federal civil immigration enforcement, as 
opposed to a federal criminal investigation. DOI also found that CIB Investigator A’s failure to inquire further 
with respect to the purpose of the assistance that HSI asked that he provide was the result of a lack of 
training and guidance by DOC.   
 
DOI’s investigation made a series of findings that included: 
 
• In November 2024, CIB Investigator A utilized City resources and provided information about 
Concepcion’s and Villa Nueva’s custodial status to HSI agents, in violation of 
§10-178 of the New 
York City Administrative Code , which prohibits agencies from using City resources in furtherance 
of civil immigration enforcement. CIB Investigator A placed alerts on Villa Nueva’s and 
Concepcion’s custodial records and informed HSI agents of their next court dates. While both 
individuals were charged in pending criminal cases at that time; the charges on which they were 
convicted and other circumstances did not meet the criteria for permissible information sharing 
between local and federal authorities in furtherance of civil immigration enforcement.  
 
• In December 2024, CIB Investigator A further assisted HSI agents by providing a screen shot of 
Villa Nueva’s PIC detail report, containing his booking photo, pedigree information, criminal 
charges, next court date, and other custodial information. Villa Nueva’s criminal case was still 
pending and there were no changes in circumstances that might have permitted DOC to share such 
information with federal immigration authorities in furtherance of civil immigration enforcement.  
 
• In February 2025, CIB Investigator A assisted federal immigration authorities in the arrest of 
Concepcion. Among other assistance, CIB Investigator A provided federal authorities with 
information about Concepcion’s discharge status and whereabouts, in real time,  upon 
Concepcion’s release from DOC custody. Immigration authorities did not present either a civil 
immigration detainer or a judicial warrant, both of which are prerequisites for local authorities to 
provide assistance when other criteria also are  met – namely that the subject of the detainer or 
warrant be convicted of a “violent or serious crime” as defined in 
§9-131 of the New York City 
Administrative Code. Concepcion was convicted of Assault in the Third Degree, which does not 
meet that definition, and therefore the assistance provided was in violation of New York City Law. 
CIB Investigator A did not realize that the assistance he provided was in furtherance of federal 
immigration enforcement.  
 
• Prior to DOI making DOC aware of the issue, DOC had not provided any other guidance to DOC 
personnel with respect to  DOC’s rules and procedures for interacting with law enforcement 
agencies involved in immigration enforcement.  
 
• DOC does not provide any training to its officers or staff about NYC “Sanctuary City” laws or DOC’s 
policy issued pursuant to those laws.  
 
3 
 
• The requests for immigration enforcement assistance relating to Concepcion and Villa Nueva were 
not reported to the Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs or posted on the Department’s website, as 
required by City Law. 
 
As a result of these findings, DOI makes the following recommendations to DOC:  
1. Provide updated guidance to DOC employees on New York City Administrative Law relating to 
immigration enforcement and applicable DOC policy. Such guidance should include:  
a. In-person training and instruction. 
b. Memorandums outlining and explaining the relevant New York City Law. The 
memorandums should identify scenarios, specific to DOC, where the laws may apply and 
provide specific guidance to staff on what to do in each scenario. 
 
DOC accepted this recommendation and responded as follows: 
 
The Department has already taken affirmative and concrete steps to implement this 
recommendation. On April 30, 2025, the Legal Division conducted an in-person training for 
staff in the CIB, SIU, and Custody Management. On May 14, 2025, the Department issued 
Teletype No. HQ-00899-0 to all commands, reiterating obligations under the local law and 
DOC Operations Order 9/19. T he Department will continue to explore opportunities for 
training personnel, including incorporating these modules into recruit and promotional 
academy curricula, and refresher sessions for previously trained staff. 
 
2. Provide specific guidance to staff on how to respond to requests from law enforcement partners , 
including:  
a. Specific follow-up questions DOC staff should ask if assistance is sought, such as:  
i. What is the primary purpose of the request?  
ii. Is there an active criminal investigation and w hat specific crimes are being 
investigated?  
iii. Is the information you are seeking for the purpose of immigration enforcement? If 
so, please provide a copy of the civil immigration detainer and judicial warrant.   
b. When to seek supervisory approval, or the approval of the General Counsel’s office, 
including if the staff member receiving the request does not know whether or not the 
request relates to immigration enforcement. 
 
DOC partially accepted this recommendation and responded as follows: 
 
The Department has implemented training for CIB and SIU staff on proper communication 
protocols with federal immigration authorities, in accordance with local law. Further, the 
Department maintains a clear policy structure whereby communications with federal 
immigration authorities regarding persons in DOC custody are centralized through the DOC 
ICE Unit, which consults with the DOC Legal Division. While additional scripted follow -up 
questions are not formally adopted at this time, the Department believes the current 
framework provides sufficient safeguards and guidance. 
 
3. Instruct all DOC staff to direct any immigration- related requests from other law enforc ement 
authorities to the ICE Unit and the General Counsel’s Office. 
 
DOC accepted this recommendation and responded as follows: 
 
The Department Teletype that was issued on May 14, 2025, directs all staff to immediately 
refer immigration-related requests to the DOC ICE Unit and the DOC Legal Division, as 
required by DOC Operations Order 9/19. This ensures uniform compliance with City law 
and prohibits unauthorized staff action in response to requests related to civil immigration  
enforcement. 
 
4. Operations Order 9/19 Section IV.A(2)(a) requires all department staff to notify the ICE Unit of any 
immigration-related requests. To ensure compliance with City Law, DOC should also require that 
the ICE Unit, on a regular basis, ask other DOC units if they have received any immigration 
enforcement-related requests and require a written response. Operations Order 9/19 Section 
IV.A(2)(a) should be amended to include this requirement. 
4 
 
 
DOC advised the recommendation is under consideration and responded to as follows:  
 
Though DOC staff are already apprised through established policies and procedures of 
the obligations relating to immigration-related inquiries, the Department will consider 
amending the policy to require the DOC ICE Unit or the Legal Division to confirm with 
other units whether civil immigration enforcement requests were received. 
5. Instruct senior officials at DOC to confer with senior officials at federal agencies with whom DOC 
staff regularly collaborate to remind them that DOC staff is bound by City Law and cannot assist in 
the enforcement of civil immigration law except under very limited circumstances.  
 
DOC accepted this recommendation and responded as follows: 
 
DOC will confer with senior officials at federal agencies to remind them that DOC is 
bound by City Law and cannot assist in enforcement of civil immigration law, exc ept 
under very limited circumstances. DOC remains committed to ensuring that its practices 
comply with all applicable laws and will continue to train staff accordingly. 
6. Conduct a department -wide audit to determine whether there were other instances where the 
Department, unintentionally or otherwise, assisted in immigration enforcement.  
 
DOC partially accepted this recommendation and responded as follows: 
 
The DOC ICE Unit maintains data on the number of detainers that are lodged with the 
Department, and the number of notifications that are made, among other data sets, and 
publishes the report on its website, as required by the New York City Administrative Code 
§ 9-131. The public reports can be found here: 
 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/doc/data/statistics-and-compliance.page
  
 
While an agency wide audit is impractical, the Department will consider targeted reviews 
consistent with Recommendation #4. 
7. In accordance with the requirements of §10- 178(d) of the New York City Administrative Code, 
report any previously unknown or unreported immigration enforcement -related requests to the 
Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs. 
 
DOC accepted this recommendation and responded as follows: 
 
The Department submits all reports required by §10- 178(d) of the New York City 
Administrative Code, to the Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs. 
 
The investigation was conducted by DOC Captain Lawrence Bond, assigned to DOI as a 
Correctional Investigator in DOI’s Office of the Inspector for DOC, and Special Counsel to the Inspectors 
General Maria Paolillo, and was supervised by Inspector General Marissa Carro, Deputy Commissioner of 
Strategic Initiatives Christopher Ryan, and Deputy  Commissioner/Chief of Investigations Dominick 
Zarrella. 
 
 
DOI is one of the oldest law-enforcement agencies in the country and New York City’s corruption watchdog. Investigations 
may involve any agency, officer, elected official or employee of the City, as well as those who do business with or receive benefits 
from the City. DOI’s strategy attacks corruption comprehensively through systemic investigations that lead to high-impact arrests, 
preventive internal controls and operational reforms that improve the way the City runs. 
 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
 
  
 
New York City 
Department of Investigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber 
Commissioner 
 
Marissa Carro 
Inspector General for the City Department of Correction  
 
 
September 2025 
 
DOI Investigation into DOC 
Correction Intelligence Bureau Investigator 
Assisting Federal Agents 
with Immigration Enforcement 
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
Table of Contents
 
 
I. Executive Summary ............................................................................................................................. 1 
II. Background ......................................................................................................................................... 3 
A. Complaint .................................................................................................................................. 3 
B. Scope and Methodology .............................................................................................................. 4 
III. Review of Applicable Laws and Policies ............................................................................................... 4 
A. Executive Orders and City Laws .......................................................................................................... 4 
i. Executive Order 124 of 1989 ....................................................................................................... 4 
ii. Executive Orders 34 and 41......................................................................................................... 4 
iii. Local Law 62 of 2011(Administrative Code §9-131) .................................................................... 4 
iv. Local Law 58 2014 (Administrative Code §9-131) ....................................................................... 5 
v. Local Law 228 of 2017 (Administrative Code §10-178) ............................................................... 5 
vi. Local Law 246 of 2017 ............................................................................................................... 6 
vii. Executive Order 50 ................................................................................................................. 6 
B. DOC Policies and Training ......................................................................................................... 6 
i. Operations Order 9/19................................................................................................................. 6 
ii. DOC ICE Unit ............................................................................................................................ 8 
IV. Investigative Findings .......................................................................................................................... 9 
V. Further Investigation .......................................................................................................................... 12 
VI. Conclusion – Findings and Recommendations ..................................................................................... 13 
VII. Addenda ............................................................................................................................................ 16 
 
 
  
  
 
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 1  
 
I. Executive Summary 
 
New York City laws – referred to as “Sanctuary City” laws -- prohibit City agencies from assisting 
the federal government with enforcement of the federal civil immigration laws. The Department of 
Correction (“DOC”), like other City agencies, has implemented policies that prohibit DOC employees from 
providing such assistance to federal authorities. On February 5, 2025, a complainant informed the New 
York City Department of Investigation (“DOI”) that on February 3, 2025, DOC officers assigned to a joint 
federal task force assisted Immigration and Customs Enforcement (“ICE”) agents with the arrest and 
apprehension of a person in custody (“PIC”) upon his release from a New York City jail. The PIC, later 
identified as Cristian Concepcion
1 (“Concepcion”), was believed to have entered the country illegally in 
violation of the Immigration and Nationality Act (“INA”). The complainant alleged that DOC officers 
informed ICE agents of the anticipated date and time of the PIC’s release from custody and provided real 
time updates to the agents about his movements following his release from Rikers Island, so that ICE could 
take custody of him, in furtherance of ICE’s civil immigration law enforcement responsibilities.  
    
Many New York City law enforcement agencies, includi ng the DOC, maintain partnerships with 
federal law enforcement agencies and assign some of their employees to federal task forces where City 
employees work collaboratively with federal agents. These longstanding federal/local partnerships serve 
vital law enforcement interests, facilitating the mitigation of public safety threats, apprehension of fugitives, 
and investigations and prosecutions of criminal conduct. The terms of these relationships are commonly 
memorialized through an agreement known as a Memorandum of Understanding (“MOU”). DOC has such 
agreements with the United States Marshals Service (“USMS”) Regional Fugitive Task Force, the 
Homeland Security Investigations (“HSI”) Violent Gang Task Force, and the Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms 
& Explosives (“ATF”) Joint Firearms Task Force, and has assigned DOC officers to each. 
DOI’s investigation concluded that an investigator assigned to the DOC Correction Intelligence 
Bureau
2 (“CIB”) and the HSI Violent Gang Task Force (“CIB Investigator A”) did in fact ass ist federal 
immigration authorities in the apprehension of Concepcion, as alleged by the complainant, in violation of 
New York City Law and DOC policy. Furthermore, while investigating that allegation, DOI also found that 
CIB Investigator A provided inform ation about another PIC, Pedro Mujica Villa Nueva (“Villa Nueva”), 
in furtherance of federal civil immigration enforcement, to federal immigration authorities. DOI also 
determined that CIB Investigator A did not appreciate that the assistance he provided was in furtherance of 
federal civil immigration enforcement, and thus impermissible, as opposed to in furtherance of a federal 
criminal investigation, which would have been consistent with local law.  DOI also found that CIB 
Investigator A’s failure to inquire further with respect to the purpose of the assistance that he was asked to 
provide was the result of a lack of training and guidance by DOC.   
 
In particular, DOI’s investigation found:  
 
1. CIB Investigator A assisted federal immigration authorities with federal civil immigration 
enforcement in violation of New York City Administrative Law and DOC Policy.  
                                                    
1 Law enforcement database searches indicate that Concepcion is also known as Cristian Jose Concepcion -
Manrique. 
2 CIB is responsible for gathering intelligence and conducting investigations relating to the safety and security of 
PICs, including gang related or other violent activity.  
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 2  
 
2. In November 2024, CIB Investigator A utilized City resources and provided information about 
Concepcion’s and Villa Nueva’s custodial status to HSI agents, in violation of §10 -178 of the 
New York City Administrative Code, which prohibits agencies from using City resources in 
furtherance of federal civil immigration enforcement. CIB Investigator A placed alerts on Villa 
Nueva’s and Concepcion’s custodial records and informed HSI agents of their next court dates. 
While both individuals were charged in pending criminal cases at that time; the charges of 
conviction and other circumstances did not meet the criteria for permissible information 
sharing between local and federal authorities in furtherance of civil immigration enforcement.  
3. In December 2024, CIB Investigator A further assisted HSI agents by providing a screen shot 
of Villa Nueva’s Person in Custody detail report, containing his booking photo, pedigre e 
information, criminal charges, next court date and other custodial information. Villa Nueva’s 
criminal case was still pending and there were no changes in his circumstances that might have 
permitted DOC to share such information with federal immigration authorities in furtherance 
of civil immigration enforcement.  
4. In February 2025, CIB Investigator A assisted federal immigration authorities in the arrest of 
Concepcion.  Among other assistance, CIB Investigator A provided federal authorities with 
information about Concepcion’s discharge status and whereabouts, in real time, upon 
Concepcion’s release from DOC custody. Federal immigration authorities  did not present 
either a civil immigration detainer or a judicial warrant, both of which are prerequisites for  
local authorities to provide assistance, when other criteria also are met – namely that the subject 
of the detainer or warrant be convicted of a “violent or serious crime” as defined in §9 -131 of 
the New York City Administrative Code.  Concepcion was convicted of Assault in the Third 
Degree, which does not meet that definition, and therefore the assistance provided was in 
violation of New York City Law. CIB Investigator A did not realize that the assistance he 
provided was in furtherance of federal civil i mmigration enforcement.  
5. DOC has not reissued  Operations Order  9/19: Interactions With Federal Immigration 
Authorities, which describes the circumstances under which DOC employees may assist 
federal immigration authorities, since 2019 it was first issued.   
6. Prior to DOI making DOC aware of the issue, DOC had not provided any other guidance to 
DOC personnel with respect to DOC’s rules and procedures for interacting with law 
enforcement agencies involved in federal civil immigration enforcement.  
7. DOC does not provide any training to its officers or staff about NYC “Sanctuary City” laws or 
DOC’s policies issued pursuant to those laws.  
8. DOC does not provide any specific or enhanced training to officers or staff assigned to joint 
federal task forces, who may be more likely to receive requests for immigration assistance due 
to their close working relationships with federal authorities. 
9. The requests for federal civil immigration enforcement assistance relating to Concepcion and 
Villa Nueva were not repor ted to the Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs or posted on the 
Department’s website, as required by City Law.  
Based on the above, DOI makes the following recommendations to DOC:  
 
1. Provide updated guidance to DOC employees on New York City Administrative Law relating to 
civil immigration enforcement and applicable DOC policy. Such guidance should include:  
a. In-person training and instruction. 
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 3  
 
b. Memorandums outlining and explaining the relevant New York City Law. The 
memorandums should identify scenarios, specific to DOC, where the laws may apply and 
provide specific guidance to staff on what to do in each scenario.  
2. Provide specific guidance to staff on how to respond to requests from la w enforcement partners, 
including:  
a. Specific follow-up questions DOC staff should ask if assistance is sought, such as:  
i. What is the primary purpose of the request?  
ii. Is there an active criminal investigation and what specific crimes are being 
investigated?  
iii. Is the information you are seeking for the purpose of immigration enforcement? If 
so, please provide a copy of the civil immigration detainer and judicial warrant.   
b. When to seek supervisory approval, or the approval of the General Counsel’s office, 
including if the staff member receiving the request does not know whether the request 
relates to immigration enforcement. 
3. Instruct all DOC staff to direct any immigration -related requests from other law enforcement 
authorities to the ICE Unit and the General Counsel’s Office. 
4. Operations Order 9/19 Section IV.A(2)(a) requires all department staff to notify the ICE Unit of 
any immigration-related requests. To ensure compliance with City Law, DOC should also require 
that the ICE Unit, on a regular basis, ask other  DOC units if they have received any civil 
immigration enforcement-related requests and require a written response. Operations Order 9/19 
Section IV.A(2)(a) should be amended to include this requirement.  
5. Instruct senior officials at DOC to confer with senior officials at federal agencies with whom DOC 
staff regularly collaborate to remind them that DOC staff is bound by City Law and cannot assist 
in the enforcement of civil immigration law except under very limited circumstances.  
6. Conduct a department -wide audit to determine whether there were other instances where the 
Department, unintentionally or otherwise, assisted in civil immigration enforcement.  
7. In accordance with the requirements of §10 -178(d) of the New York City Administrative Code, 
report any previously unknown or unreported civil immigration enforcement-related requests to the 
Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs. 
 
II. Background 
 
A. Complaint  
 
DOI received a complaint on February 5, 2025 that prompted this investigation. The complainant 
alleged that between 1330 hours and 1400 hours on February 3, 2025, CIB investigator s3 provided ICE 
agents with information in real time  about the  movement of a PIC being released from DOC custody. 
Specifically, the investigator notified ICE when the PIC was released f rom DOC custody and when he 
boarded an MTA bus leaving Rikers Island. The complainant described the former PIC as a male Hispanic, 
formerly housed in the Eric M. Taylor Center (“EMTC”).  
 
 
 
 
                                                    
3 DOI determined that only one CIB investigator assisted ICE on February 3, 2025, not multiple as alleged by the 
complainant. 
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 4  
 
B. Scope and Methodology 
 
DOI conducted an extensive review of appli cable City Law and DOC policy related to the 
enforcement of federal immigration law. DOI reviewed video footage related to Concepcion’s release and 
subsequent arrest on February 3, 2025. These videos included footage from EMTC , the Samuel L. Perry 
Center4 (“Perry Center”), Rikers Island Central Casher/Bail Room, Rikers Island bridge and the Rikers 
Island entrance sign. DOI reviewed all e-mail communications between CIB Investigator A and HSI agents 
from October 1, 2024, to April 17, 2025.  DOI reviewed DOC records detailing the number of ICE detainers 
received by the agency from July 2024 to February 2025.  DOI also interviewed DOC staff members, 
including CIB Investigator  A , a DOC captain  responsible for compiling and maintaining ICE detaine r 
records, and the Commanding Officer of CIB (“CIB Executive Officer”).  
III. Review of Applicable Laws and Policies 
“Sanctuary City” laws and policies limit how and when local officials can share information with  
federal immigration authorities about non -citizens in connection with the enforcement of civil federal 
immigration law.  These laws and related policies  often restrict local authorities’ ability to share 
information about an individual's immigration status, bar local law enforcement from honoring ICE 
detainers (requests to hold an individual believed to be in the United States illegally until ICE can take 
that person into custody), and prohibit city agencies from assisting with federal civil immigration 
enforcement. The Sanctuary City laws and policies seek to encourage undocumented immigrants to report 
crimes, seek medical help, and access other essential services without fear of deportation.  
 
A. Executive Orders and City Laws 
 
i. Executive Order 124 of 1989  
In 1989 then -Mayor Ed Koch signed Executive Order No. 124, the City’s first “Sanctuary City” 
policy.  EO 124 barred city employees from disclosing information regarding a non -citizen, or alien, to 
federal immigration authorities unless either expressly authorized by such individual or if the individual 
was suspected of engaging in criminal activity. The law aimed to ensure that immigrants could access  city 
services without fear of deportation.  
 
ii. Executive Orders 34 and 41 
In 2003, to address changes in federal law affecting EO No. 124’s reporting prohibition, then-
Mayor Michael Bloomberg issued Executive Order No. 34 (as amended by Executive Order No. 41), 
prohibiting city employees from disclosing  immigration status information and inquiring about a person’s 
immigration status.   
 
iii. Local Law 62 of 2011(Administrative Code §9-131) 
In 2011, the Council passed Local Law 62
 of 2011, limiting DOC’s cooperation with ICE and 
requiring DOC to publish data related to its cooperation with ICE on the Department’s website. The purpose 
of the legislation was to ensure that DOC cooperated  with ICE solely to detain and remove only limited 
                                                    
4 The MTA Q100 Bus, which provides direct transportation to and from Rikers Island, stops in front of the Perry 
Center.  Discharged PICs depart Rikers Island via this bus, absent other transportation.  
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 5  
 
categories of individuals and to prohibit DOC from honoring ICE’s civil immigration detainers for other 
individuals. Specifically, the law prohibited DOC from (i) holding an individual beyond the time when  
he/she would otherwise be released from DOC custody, and (ii) notifying federal immigration authorities 
of such individual’s release, for any individual who (a) has never been convicted of a misdemeanor or 
felony; (b) is not a defendant in a pending criminal case in any jurisdiction; (c) has no outstanding criminal 
warrants; (d) is not and has not previously been subject to a final order of removal, nor has an outstanding 
warrant of removal; (e) is not identified as a known gang member; and (f) is not identified as a possible 
match in the terrorist screening database. This rule effectively limited DOC’s ability to hold individuals 
beyond their release date and time or to notify federal immigration authorities of their release to a narrow 
set of individuals meeting specific criteria.  
 
iv. Local Law 58 2014 (Administrative Code §9-131) 
 In 2014, the Council passed Local Law 58, further limiting the circumstances under which DOC 
can honor ICE detainers. The law requires that DOC honor detainers only when ICE prese nts a judicial 
warrant with its detainer, issued by an Article III federal judge or a federal magistrate, and based on 
“probable cause” and when the subject of the detainer and warrant is either listed in a terrorist database or 
has been convicted of a “vi olent or serious” crime.
5 Local Law 58 eliminated certain circumstances in 
which DOC was previously permitted to honor ICE detainers, including where: (i) the subject has any open 
criminal charge; (ii) the subject has an open criminal warrant; (iii) the subject is listed as a gang member in 
a national database; or (iv) the subject was convicted of a non -“violent or serious” crime. Local Law 58 
also significantly limited the extent to which DOC may allow ICE to maintain a physical presence within 
DOC facilities, as well as DOC’s communication with ICE. DOC could no longer allow ICE to maintain 
“offices or quarters” on DOC-controlled land for the purposes of enforcing civil immigration laws and DOC 
staff were prohibited from communicating with ICE regarding an individual’s incarceration status, release 
date, court appearance date, or any other information about the individual, unless such response or 
communication: (i) relates to an individual who is convicted of a violent or serious crime or identified as a 
possible match in the terrorist screening database;
 (ii) is unrelated to the enforcement of civil immigration 
laws; or (iii) is otherwise required by law.  
 
v. Local Law 228 of 2017 (Administrative Code §10- 178)  
Local Law 228 of 2017 continued to limit the City’s cooperation with federal authorities for 
purposes of “civil immigration enforcement,” defined as “any civil provision of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act and any provision of such law that penalizes a person’s presence in, entry into, or reentry 
into the United States.”  The law specifically prohibits any city agency to subject its officers or employees 
to the direction and supervision of the Secretary of Homeland Security in furtherance of civil immigr ation 
enforcement. The law also prohibits agencies from using City resources for civil immigration enforcement 
and imposes a record keeping and recording obligation on City agencies with respect to non -local law 
enforcement requests related to civil immigration enforcement.  
 
In 2018, then-Mayor Bill De Blasio issued citywide guidance and new NYPD protocols pursuant 
to Local Law 228, to clarify and implement the City’s policy to avoid voluntary cooperation with federal 
civil immigration enforcement activities, and to coordinate with federal authorities for immigration 
purposes in limited circumstances only. In addition, the guidance prohibits City agencies from entering into 
formal or informal arrangements in which City employees are supervised by federal im migration officials. 
                                                    
5 The term “violent or serious crime” is defined to include reference to a list of approximately 170 enumerated 
felonies.  
 
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 6  
 
Consistent with the law’s requirements, this guidance obligates City agencies to document requests from 
non-local law enforcement agencies seeking assistance with civil immigration enforcement and to report 
those requests to the Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs.6 
 
vi. Local Law 246 of 2017  
Local Law 246 of 2017 restricts access to non -public areas of city property by non- local law 
enforcement personnel, with certain limited exceptions. The law further requires that any City agency with 
jurisdiction over city property adopt guidelines or rules in furtherance of the law, including designating an 
individual at each city agency who would be responsible for the implementation of the law and its applicable 
rules and policies.   
 
vii. Executive Order 50  
In April of 2025, First Deputy Mayor Randy Mastro issued Executive Order 50, allowing certain 
federal law enforcement agencies to maintain office space on DOC property, staffed with designated 
personnel. The order specifically allows federal agencies including the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, the Drug Enforcement Administration, Homeland 
Security Investigations, and the U.S. Postal Inspection Service to establish an office on DOC property, 
including Rikers Island, “for the purpose of criminal enforcement and criminal investigations only.” The 
Order further allows for coordination between federal law enforcement agencies and CIB in their criminal 
investigations and intelligence sharing concerning “violent criminals and gangs, crimes committed at or 
facilitated by persons in DOC custody, and drug trafficking.” The Order requires that the use of such federal 
office space “be limited to purposes unrelated to the enforcement of civil immigrations laws,” in accordance 
with New York City Administrative Code §9 -131 of Local Law 58 2014. On June 12, 2025, New York 
State Supreme Court Judge Mary Rosado granted the Council of the City of New York’s motion for a 
preliminary injunction, enjoining the City from taking any action to implement or otherwise advance 
Executive Order 50.
7 On September 8, 2025, Justice Rosado issued a decision invalidating Executive Order 
50 due to the appearance of a conflict of interest between Mayor Eric Adams and other government 
authorities.
8   
 
B. DOC Policies and Training  
 
i. Operations Order 9/19  
On March 29, 2019, the DOC issued a nineteen -page order detailing the policies and procedures  
governing DOC’s interaction with federal immigration authorities. 
 
As detailed in the “Policy” section, Operations Order 9/19 (“Order 9/19”) incorporates 
Administrative Code §10-178, mandating that no officer or employee of DOC be supervised or directed by 
the DHS Secretary in furtherance of civil immigration enforcement and that no officer or employee use city 
                                                    
6 Memorandum from Dean Fuleihan to Agency Commissioners and Directors, “Guidance for agency 
implementation of Local Law 228 of 2017 (“in relation to immigration enforcement”),” January 31, 2018 (on file 
with DOI). 
 
7 Council of City of N.Y. v. Adams, — N.Y.S.3rd —, 2025 N.Y. Slip Op 25141 (Sup.Ct., N.Y. County 2025).  
8 Council of City of  N.Y. v. Adams , Index No. 154909/2025, decision and order issued September 8, 2025; ICE-on-
Rikers-Final-Order-and-Judgment-1.pdf. 
 
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 7  
 
resources for federal civil immigration enforcement efforts, absent an exception. The Order directs that any 
request for assistance by a federal civil immigration enforcement agency, as well as any subsequent actions 
by DOC’s officers or employees, be documented. The Order also references Administrative Code §9 -131 
and §23-1202
9 and gives guidance on how to address a request from DHS for continued detention of a PIC 
or notification of the date and time of their expected release. 
   
Order 9/19 provides procedures governing DOC’s cooperation with federal immigration authorities 
where appropriate, including: A. use of City resources for civil immigration enforcement; B. interactions 
with inmates with immigration detainer s; C. sharing information with federal law enforcement agencies; 
and D. conducting ICE interviews.
10 
 
A. Use of City Resources for Civil immigration enforcement  
As stated in Order 9/19, DOC staff may not “consent to a request from a non-local law enforcement 
agency for assistance or support intended to further civil immigration enforcement, or otherwise provide 
such assistance or support” except in limited circumstances including when there is a cooperative 
arrangement, such as a task force, that is not primarily intended to further civil immigration enforcement.11 
That is, DOC staff can continue to participate in task forces with other goals –  such as bringing criminal 
charges – even if that work has some impact on an individual’s immigration status. This section also directs 
that department staff  immediately notify the ICE Unit of any request for assistance with civil immigration 
enforcement from non- local law enforcement, and that the General Counsel’s Office report all such 
requests, and any actions taken in response, to the Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs on a quarterly basis 
within ten days of the end of each quarter.
12  
 
B. Inmates with Immigration Detainers  
Order 9/19 directs DOC’s Office of Custody Management ICE Unit to honor an Immigration 
Detainer only when the inmate has a conviction for a qualifying crime or is identified as a possible match 
in the terrorist screening database and  DOC has received a federal judicial warrant with the Immigration 
Detainer. Order 9/19 further states that if DHS requests in writing advance notice of the time of release of 
an inmate, DOC may notify DHS of the time the inmate would ordinarily be released.  The Order prohibits 
an officer or employee from extending the standard discharge time or otherwise detaining an inmate beyond 
the time authorized by New York State and local law  in response to such a request from DHS . Moreover, 
if an inmate does not meet the  criteria required to honor an Immigration Detainer, the Order directs DOC  
not to notify DHS of the inmate’s release and to discharge the inmate in accordance with DOC’s standard 
processing directives.
13 
 
Order 9/19 also describes the procedures that the Custody Management ICE Unit must follow when 
any Immigration Detainer or other federal immigration document is received by the DOC , as well as data 
tracking and reporting requirements.
14  
 
 
                                                    
9 Administrative Code § 23-1202 governs the collection, retention, and disclosure of identifying information by city 
employees, contractors and subcontractors.  
10 Order 9/19 Section IV. A-D, pages 3-16. Attached as addendum A.  
11 Order 9/19 Section IV. A (1)(b), pages 3 -4.  
12 Order 9/19, Section IV. A (2) -(3), pages 4-5.  
13 Directive 4102R-B, “Processing of Inmates for Discharging and Transferring.”  
14 Order 9/19, IV. B (3), Page 12. 
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 8  
 
C. Sharing Information  
Upon receipt of an immigration detainer, where the inmate has been convicted of a qualifying crime 
or identified as a possible match in the terrorist screeni ng database, Order 9/19 allows for communication 
between DOC staff and DHS “in order to effectuate City Administrative Code §9-131(b) and (h) and section 
IV.B [of Order 9/19].” Order 9/19 allows a DOC staff member to provide DHS with advance notice of an 
inmate’s release date, time, or location, and to inquire as to whether DHS plans to obtain a judicial or 
administrative warrant in order to process the immigration detainer or similar request. Per Order 9/19,  
information concerning release date, time or lo cation may be shared only in furtherance of effectuating 
Administrative Code §9-131(b) and (h) and must “a. relate[] to a person convicted of a qualifying crime or 
identified as a possible match in the terrorist screening database; b. [be] unrelated to the enforcement of 
civil immigration laws, or c. [be] otherwise required by law.”15 DOC may not otherwise share information 
related to an inmate’s incarceration status, court appearance dates, or other information related to 
individuals in DOC custody. 
 
D. ICE Interviews 
Order 9/19 mandates that after DHS has made a request to speak with an inmate, DOC will make 
the inmate available for interview, if the inmate agrees to be interviewed by ICE. DOC must complete Form 
144 ICE, which requires that the inmate indicate  if they chose to be interviewed by ICE or declined to be 
interviewed.16 If the inmate agrees to speak with ICE and signs FORM 144 ICE , DOC will produce the 
inmate  to a DHS agent for an interview.  
 
Order 9/19 mandates that an informational poster entitled , “Notice to Inmates: Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement Interviews” which describes the rules around inmate interviews, including the 
requirement that the inmate consent, be conspicuously posted in various, specified areas in each facility and 
in the Inmate Handbook.17  
 
ii. DOC ICE Unit 
The ICE Unit within DOC’s Office of Custody Management works as a liaison with ICE, monitors 
all ICE detainers, and coordinates with ICE if a PIC meets the criteria to be transferred ICE custody, upon 
receiving a detainer. Pursuant to Administrative Code §10-178, DOC is required to report all such requests 
for assistance or support intended to further civil immigration enforcement, and actions taken in response, 
to the Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs. These reports are p ublished quarterly on Mayor’s Office of 
Immigrant Affairs website and by fiscal year on DOC’s website. 
   
DOI reviewed the reports for the applicable time periods July 2024 to February 2025. The reports 
do not include the November 2024 or February 2025 requests for assistance from federal immigration 
authorities, nor any information about the assistance that DOC provided, as detailed above.  
 
On June 13, 2025, DOI spoke with a Captain assigned to DOC’s Custody Management ICE Unit. 
The Captain explained that in order to comply with City Law the ICE Unit compiles a report based on ICE 
detainers entered into DOC’s Inmate Information System. The Captain told DOI that that the ICE Unit does 
not ask investigative units within DOC, such as CIB, the Special Investigation Unit, or the Investigation 
                                                    
15 Order 9/19, IV. C (2), Page 15. 
16 Order 9/19, IV. D (3), pages 15 -19.  
17 Order 9/19, IV. D (7), page 16. A copy of the Notice to Inmates attached as addendum B.  
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 9  
 
Division, if they have received requests from federal immigration authorities. The ICE Unit monitors PICs 
with immigration detainers only.   
 
IV. Investigative Findings 
 
DOI concluded that CIB Investigator A’s assistance to HSI was in violation of New York City 
Law. In the case of Concepcion, CIB’s participation was critical to the arrest of Concepcion by ICE on 
February 3, 2025, following his release from Rikers Island. D OI also found that CIB Investigator A 
provided information about another PIC held on Rikers Island, Villa Nueva, in furtherance of civil 
immigration enforcement. This section details DOI’s findings which led to these conclusions and support 
DOI’s recommendations to improve DOC’s handling of future immigration -related requests from law 
enforcement.  
 
Concepcion originally entered DOC custody on June 7, 2024, charged with a ttempted murder in 
the second degree in Kings County.
18 Concepcion was housed at EMTC while in DOC custody. On 
December 20, 2024, Concepcion pled guilty to Assault in the Third degree, a class A misdemeanor, and 
was sentenced to 1 year in jail. Concepcion’s discharge date was February 3, 2025.  
 
Villa Nueva originally entered D OC custody on July 12, 2024, charged with bail jumping in the 
second degree, grand larceny in the fourth degree and other related charges in Queens County.
19 Villa 
Nueva was housed at EMTC and the Robert N. Davoren Center while in DOC custody. On August 8, 2024, 
ICE filed an Immigration Detainer for Villa Nueva with DOC. DOC did not honor that detainer, determining 
that Villa Nueva was eligible to be discharged from DOC custody because his criminal charges did not 
meet the criteria for a transfer to ICE custody. On April 7, 2025, Villa Nueva pled guilty to bail jumping in 
the second degree and was sentenced to a conditional discharge and released on his own recognizance. 
According to the New York State Unified Court System “webcrims” website, Indictment No. 73306 -24 is 
still pending.
20 
 
CIB Investigator A is assigned to the HSI Violent Gang Task Force as a Task Force Officer and 
assists HSI in federal criminal investigations in that capacity. His primary responsibility is to provide 
information to HSI in response to requests,  including materials such as recorded jail calls, visitor records, 
and relevant DOC incident reports. He is not the primary or lead investigator on any HSI investigations, 
and therefore he is not consistently informed or aware of all of the details of, or the full scope of, the 
investigations in which he assists. CIB Investigator A informed DOI that he had attended a Task Force 
Officer course at HSI in January 2024 where he learned that he could not assist federal agencies with any 
civil immigration enforcement actions, but said that he never received any training or guidance from DOC 
about interacting with ICE agents, how to determine whether an ICE request involved civil immigration 
enforcement, or how to handle ICE requests more generally. CIB Investigato r A was unaware of Order 
9/19, and understood that as a City employee he should not assist federal agencies with civil immigration 
enforcement based on his experience from a prior assignment before CIB. CIB Investigator A believed that 
all immigration-related requests went through DOC’s Office of Custody Management, ICE Unit, that is, he 
did not expect to receive any such requests through his work on the HSI task force.   
 
CIB Investigator A acknowledged that in November 2024 he received requests for inform ation 
from HSI concerning Concepcion and Villa Nueva. Specifically, on November 14, 2024, CIB Investigator 
                                                    
18 Indictment No. 73683-24. 
19 Indictment No. 73306-24 and 73308-24. 
20 https://iapps.courts.state.ny.us/webcrim_attorney/AttorneyWelcome . 
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 10  
 
A received an e- mail from an HSI agent with the subject “Athens list.” The e -mail attached a spreadsheet 
of “7 targets,” including PIC Villa Nueva. CIB Investigator A responded to HSI that an “alert” had been 
placed on Villa Nueva, whose next court date was scheduled for December 3, 2024, in Queens County 
Supreme Court. A review of Villa Nueva’s custodial records showed that a remark was placed on Vill a 
Nueva’s file by CIB Investigator A to “contact CIB prior to release.” On November 21, 2024, CIB 
Investigator A received an e- mail from an HSI agent that originated from HSI Operations, discussing an 
operation referred to as “Project Athens.” CIB Investigator A explained that he believed “Operation 
Athens” was a criminal federal conspiracy investigation targeting Tren de Aragua (“TdA”)  gang 
members,
21 and denied knowing that Concepcion and Villa Nueva were in fact the targets of federal civil 
immigration enforcement action. The November 21 st e-mail attached an expanded list of suspected TdA 
members believed to be “amenable to custody redetermination, administrative arrest or placed on an 
elevated [alternatives to detention].” Villa Nueva and Concepcion were included on the list. The e-mail sent 
to the CIB Investigator A and others asked that CIB Investigator A “put out alerts on all these individuals…” 
On November 22, 2024, CIB Investigator A responded, stating that “alerts” had been put out in DOC’s 
databases for Villa Nueva and Concepcion. CIB Investigator A also included information about the next 
court date for both individuals. 
 
As a member of the Violent Gang Task Force, CIB Investigator A stated that he did not anticipate 
being asked for information that would be used in furtherance of civil immigration enforcement. He 
confirmed that he looked up information relating to Villa Nueva and Concepcion in DOC databases and 
that on February 3, 2025, he e -mailed his DOC supervisors requesting that EMTC hold Concepcion in the 
intake area until CIB Investigator A’s arrival to Rikers Island, suggesting that HSI was going to arrest 
Concepcion at this time. CIB Investigator A explained that he used a black DOC van to surveil Concepcion 
while he (CIB Investigator A) maintained contact with HSI agents regarding Concepcion’s discharge time 
and Concepcion’s whereabouts upon being released from DOC custody.    
 
DOI found CIB Investigator A to be forthright and honest during the interview and we credit his 
assertion that he did not know that “Operation Athens” was a federal immigration enforcement operation 
and not a criminal investigation or enforcement operation targeting gang activity. Given the lack of training 
and guidance provided to task force members by DOC it is credible that CIB Investigator A did not 
appreciate what was being asked of him.
22 
                                                    
21 On or about November 26, 2024, the Acting Director of ICE appeared on Fox News to speak about TdA and 
discussed Operation Athens to “combat specifically TdA.” https://www.foxnews.com/video/6365225629112 . On 
January 20, 2025, the President of United States, through Executive Order, designated Tren de Aragua and other 
transnational organizations as a Foreign Terrorist Organization a nd Specially Designated Global Terrorists. 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2025/01/29/2025-02004/designating- cartels-and-other-organizations-as-
foreign-terrorist-organizations-and-specially.  
22 DOI investigators also interviewed CIB Executive Officer , the highest-ranking member at CIB and CIB 
Investigator A’s Commanding Officer. CIB Executive Officer stated that it is his understanding that CIB does not 
work with federal immigration authorities and does not help or assist in immigration arrests in any way. According 
to CIB Executive Officer, CIB Investigator A is DOC’s liaison with HSI, responsible for assisting in investigations 
that involve gang activity. CIB Executive Officer expressed the incorrect view that the CIB Investigator A’s 
assistance as described herein was appropriate, because the assistance was provided pursuant t o the investigator’s 
role on the HSI Task Force, and that CIB was not in a position to question directions from HSI. When asked about 
his understanding of the City’s Sanctuary City laws, the CIB Executive Officer stated that he never received any 
formal training or verbal instruction from his superiors about working with federal authorities tasked with 
conducting civil immigration enforcement. CIB Executive Officer stated that he was not familiar with Order 9/19 
 
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 11  
 
DOI investigators reviewed video surveillance footage from both the interior and exterior of 
EMTC, and entrance and exit points to and from Rikers Island from February 3, 2025. The surveillance 
footage from inside EMTC at approximately 1327 hours depicts Concepcion waiting to be discharged from 
DOC custody.
23  
 
At approximately 1328 hours, Concepcion is observed on the video surveillance footage being 
escorted by the DOC Transportation Division to a vehicle, for transport to the Rikers Island Central 
Cashier/Bail room to complete the discharge  process. Video surveil lance footage from the Rikers Island 
Central Cashier and Bail Room shows Concepcion walking towards the Perry Center. Video surveillance 
footage from the Perry Center shows Concepcion standing at the MTA bus stop in front of the Perry Center 
and boarding an MTA bus at approximately 1353 hours. As the bus drove away, a black van followed the 
bus over the Rikers Island bridge. A review of Geotab
24 records and DOC vehicle rosters revealed that the 
black van observed on the video surveillance footage was DOC vehicle #444RW, assigned to CIB. The 
driver of the van was identified through interviews with DOC staff as CIB Investigator A. Video 
surveillance footage from cameras located near the Rikers Island entrance sign at approximately 1356 hours 
shows the MTA bus stopped on the corner of Hazen St and 19th Avenue in Queens, discharging passengers. 
The same video surveillance footage shows the same black van that followed the bus off Rikers Island 
simultaneously turning right onto 19th Avenue, and stopping in front of the Rikers Island sign posted at the 
corner of Hazen Street and 19
th Avenue. At approximately 1357 hours, video surveillance footage from 
cameras located near the Rikers Island entrance sign shows that after the MTA bus departs, Concepcion 
walked across the street towards 77th and Hazen Street. Approximately 7 individuals, who DOI later learned 
were federal agents with the HSI Violent Gang Task Force, approach Concepcion, take him to the ground, 
place him in the back of an unmarked four-door vehicle, and drive away from the scene.   
 
FBI records, obtained through an Interstate Identification Index inquiry, reflect that on February 3, 
2025, Concepcion was arrested by HSI New York and charged under §212(a)(6)(A)(i) of the INA, a 
provision of federal civil immigration laws which prohibits a foreign individual to be present in the United 
States without proper admission or parole.  
 
Concepcion’s arrest was announced through an official White House social media post on X on 
February 4, 2025, which described Concepcion as “a Venezuelan national and known TdA gang member 
[who] was arrested by ICE New York on February 3, 2025 .”
25  Concepcion’s arrest was also posted on the 
                                                    
and had never read Order 9/19. CIB Executive Officer’s statements are further evidence of the lack of understanding 
within the CIB of the requirements of the Sanctuary City Laws.  
23 DOI identified the person depicted in the February 3, 2025 video footage as Concepcion.  Among other steps 
taken by DOI to identify the above- referenced individual: (1) CIB Investigator A confirmed that Concepcion was 
the individual he assisted federal agents  in apprehending on February 3, 2025; (2) DOI compared photos of 
Concepcion from the New York Post, and other social media posts, to the video surveillance footage from inside 
EMTC, and based on that comparison, DOI confirmed that the photos and video footage depicted that same person; 
(3) EMTC discharge logs listed Concepcion as being discharged on February 3, 2025 at 1338 hours, the same date 
and approximate time an individual matching Concepcion’s description was observed on video footage inside 
EMTC and waiting to be discharged; and  (4) FBI records, obtained through an Interstate Identification Index 
inquiry, reflected that Concepcion was arrested by HSI New York on February 3, 2025, the same date the individual 
depicted in video footage from inside EMTC and the entrance and exit points to Rikers Island was observed being 
taken into custody by federal law enforcement. 
24 All DOC department vehicles are outfitted with “Geotab” devices that, through the use of GPS technology and on-
board diagnostics, track and document a vehicle’s movement.  
25 https://x.com/WhiteHouse/status/1886922974575648956 . 
 
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 12  
 
official website of the United States Department of Homeland Security in a video titled “Making America 
Safe Again,” during the week of February 2, 2025.26 A New York Post article dated February 7, 2025, and 
titled “ICE makes staggering 11K illegal migrant arrests in just 18 days – forcing agency to take over four 
federal prison” also featured a photo of Concepcion, referenced his arrest by ICE and described him as a 
TdA member. 27 
 
Using ICE’s Online Detainee Locator System, DOI determined that as of March 25, 2025, 
Concepcion was held at an ICE detention facility in Florida. A subsequent search on July 23, 2025, revealed 
that Concepcion was no longer listed in the system, suggesting that Concepcion was deported or otherwise 
released from ICE custody.
28   
V. Further Investigation  
 
As a result of this investigation, DOI conducted a limited review of five DOC e-mail accounts for 
correction officers assigned to both the USMS, ATF joint task forces and their DOC supervisor. Based on 
that review, DOI found that  at least one correction officer  provided DOC custodial records to federal 
immigration authorities that may be related to civil immigration enforcement. 29 Specifically, on April 15, 
2025, a d eportation officer from ICE sent an e -mail to CIB Investigator B asking for the address, visitor 
history or any other information for a former PIC, stating that they were “going to target the PIC on 
Thursday.” CIB Investigator B responded to the e -mail that same day, providing call detail records
30 and 
the former PICs last known address.31  
 
DOI did not conduct further investigation, but the results of this limited review , as well as the 
broader findings of this investigation, suggest that DOC task force members may be unintentionally 
assisting with civil immigration enforcement. As such, DOC must take corrective action immediately and 
has already taken some positive first steps.  
 
After determining that there was at least one instance of improper assistance with civil immigration 
enforcement, DOI reached out to DOC and brought the issue to their attention. DOC immediately conducted 
a training session with CIB, the Special Investigation Unit,
32 and the Investigation Division33 and issued an 
agency wide teletype, dated May 14, 2025, underscoring Order 9/19 with instructions that it be read at 21 
consecutive roll calls.
34 
                                                    
26 https://www.dhs.gov/medialibrary/assets/video/58878 . 
27 https://nypost.com/2024/06/06/us-news/migrant- stabbed-outside-nyc-shelter-after-sitting-on-attackers-moped/. 
28 https://locator.ice.gov/odls/#/search . According to ICE’s Online Detainee Locator System website, the locator will 
only show if a person is currently in ICE custody, it will not reveal whether a person has been removed from the 
country or otherwise released from ICE custody.    
29 In the remaining four accounts, DOI did not find communications that were clear violations of City Law or DOC 
policy. 
30 Comprehensive log of phone call activity, detailing calls made, but not actual content of the call.  
31 Custodial records for the former PIC reflect that on March 29, 2025, an immigration detainer and warrant of 
removal/deportation was filed with DOC. DOC did not honor the detainer because the former PIC did not meet the 
criteria for extended detention for the purposes of civil immigration enforcement and the former P IC was 
subsequently released from DOC on April 5, 2025.  These records suggest that the deportation officer’s outreach to 
DOC on April 15 was for the purposes of immigration enforcement.   
32 The Special Investigation Unit is responsible for conducting administrative employee misconduct investigations. 
33 The Investigation Division is responsible for conducting administrative use of force investigations.  
34 Addendum C.   
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 13  
 
VI. Conclusion – Findings and Recommendations 
 
DOI’s investigation determined that:  
1. CIB Investigator A assisted federal immigration authorities with federal civil immigration 
enforcement in violation of New York City Administrative Law and DOC Policy.  
2. In November 2024, CIB Investigator A utilized City resources and provided information about 
Concepcion’s and Villa Nueva’s custodial status to HSI agents, in violation of §10-178 of the New 
York City Administrative Code, which prohibits agencies from using City resources in furtherance 
of federal civil immigration enforcement. CIB Investigator A placed alerts on Villa Nueva’s and 
Concepcion’s custodial records and informed HSI agents of their next court dates. While both 
individuals were charged in pending criminal cases at that time; the charges of conviction and other 
circumstances did not meet the criteria for permissible information sharing between local and 
federal authorities in furtherance of civil immigration enforcement.  
3. In December 2024, CIB Inves tigator A further assisted HSI agents by providing a screen shot of 
Villa Nueva’s Person in Custody detail report, containing his booking photo, pedigree information, 
criminal charges, next court date and other custodial information. Villa Nueva’s criminal case was 
still pending and there were no changes in his circumstances that might have permitted DOC to 
share such information with federal immigration authorities in furtherance of civil immigration 
enforcement.  
4. In February 2025, CIB Investigator A assis ted federal immigration authorities in the arrest of 
Concepcion.  Among other assistance, CIB Investigator A provided federal authorities with 
information about Concepcion’s discharge status and whereabouts, in real time, upon Concepcion’s 
release from DOC  custody. Federal immigration authorities  did not present either a civil 
immigration detainer or a judicial warrant, both of which are prerequisites for local authorities to 
provide assistance, when other criteria also are met –  namely that the subject of the detainer or 
warrant be convicted of a “violent or serious crime” as defined in §9 -131 of the New York City 
Administrative Code.  Concepcion was convicted of Assault in the Third Degree, which does not 
meet that definition, and therefore the assistance provided was in violation of New York City Law. 
CIB Investigator A did not realize that the assistance he provided was in furtherance of federal civil 
immigration enforcement.  
5. DOC has not reissued Operations Order 9/19: Interactions With Federal Immigration Authorities, 
which describes the circumstances under which DOC employees may assist federal immigration 
authorities, since 2019 it was first issued.   
6. Prior to DOI making DOC aware of the issue, DOC had not provided any other guidance to DOC 
personnel with respect to DOC’s rules and procedures for interacting with law enforcement 
agencies involved in federal civil immigration enforcement.  
7. DOC does not provide any training to its officers or staff about NYC “Sanctuary City” laws or 
DOC’s policies issued pursuant to those laws.  
8. DOC does not provide any specific or enhanced training to officers or staff assigned to joint federal 
task forces, who may be more likely to receive requests for immigration assistance due to their 
close working relationships with federal authorities. 
9. The requests for federal civil immigration enforcement assistance relating to Concepcion and Villa 
Nueva were not reported to the Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs or posted on the Department’s 
website, as required by City Law.  
Based on these findings, DOI makes the following policy recommendations to DOC:  
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 14  
 
 
1. Provide updated guidance to DOC employees on New York City Administrative Law relating to 
civil immigration enforcement and applicable DOC policy. Such guidance  should include:  
a. In-person training and instruction. 
b. Memorandums outlining and explaining the relevant New York City Law . The 
memorandums should identify scenarios, specific to DOC, where the laws may apply and 
provide specific guidance to staff on what to do in each scenario.  
 
DOC accepted this recommendation and responded as follows:  
 
The Department has already taken affirmative and concrete steps to implement this 
recommendation. On April 30, 2025, the Legal Division conducted an in-person training for 
staff in the CIB, SIU, and Custody Management. On May 14, 2025, the Department issued 
Teletype No. HQ-00899-0 to all commands, reiterating obligations under the local law and 
DOC Operations Order 9/19. The Department will continue to explore opportunitie s for 
training personnel, including incorporating these modules into recruit and promotional 
academy curricula, and refresher sessions for previously trained staff. 
 
2. Provide specific guidance to staff on how to respond to requests from law enforcement partners, 
including:  
a. Specific follow-up questions DOC staff should ask if assistance is sought , such as:  
i. What is the primary purpose of the request?  
ii. Is there an active criminal investigation and what specific crimes are being 
investigated?  
iii. Is the information you are seeking for the purpose of  immigration enforcement? If 
so, please provide a copy of the civil immigration detainer and judicial warrant.   
b. When to seek supervisory approval, or the approval of the General Counsel’s office, 
including if the staff member receiving the request does not know whether or not the request 
relates to immigration enforcement. 
 
DOC partially accepted this recommendation and responded as follows:  
 
The Department has implemented training for CIB and SIU staff on proper communication 
protocols with federal immigration authorities, in accordance with local law.  Further, the 
Department maintains a clear policy structure whereby communicatio ns with federal 
immigration authorities regarding persons in DOC custody are centralized through the DOC 
ICE Unit, which consults with the DOC Legal Division. While additional scripted follow -
up questions are not formally adopted at this time, the Departme nt believes the current 
framework provides sufficient safeguards and guidance.  
 
3. Instruct all DOC staff to direct any immigration -related requests from other law enforcement 
authorities to the ICE Unit and the General Counsel’s Office. 
 
DOC accepted this recommendation and responded as follows:  
 
The Department Teletype that was issued on May 14, 2025, directs all staff to immediately 
refer immigration-related requests to the DOC ICE Unit and the DOC Legal Division, as 
required by DOC Operations Order 9/19.  This ensures uniform compliance with City law 
and prohibits unauthorized staff action in response to requests related to civil immigration 
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 15  
 
enforcement.  
 
4. Operations Order 9/19 Section IV.A(2)(a) requires all department staff to notify the ICE Unit of any 
immigration-related requests. To ensure compliance with City Law, DOC should also require that 
the ICE Unit, on a regular basis, ask other DOC units if they have received any civil immigration 
enforcement-related requests and require a written response. Operations Order 9/19 Section 
IV.A(2)(a) should be amended to include this requirement. 
 
DOC advised the recommendation is under consideration and responded to as follows:  
 
Though DOC staff are already apprised through established policies and procedures of the 
obligations relating to immigration -related inquiries, the Department will consider 
amending the policy to require the DOC ICE Unit or the Legal Division to confirm with 
other units whether civil immigration enforcement requests were received.  
 
5. Instruct senior officials at DOC to confer with senior officials at federal agencies with whom DOC 
staff regularly collaborate to remind them that DOC staff is bound by City Law and cannot assist in 
the enforcement of civil immigration law except under very limi ted circumstances. 
 
DOC accepted this recommendation and responded as follows: 
 
DOC will confer with senior officials at federal agencies to remind them that DOC is bound 
by City Law and cannot assist in enforcement of civil immigration law, except under very 
limited circumstances. DOC remains committed to ensuring that its practices comply with 
all applicable laws and will continue to train staff accordingly.  
 
6. Conduct a department -wide audit to determine whether there were other instances where the 
Department, unintentionally or otherwise, assisted in civil immigration enforcement.  
 
DOC partially accepted this recommendation and responded as follows:  
The DOC ICE Unit maintains data on the number of detainers that are lodged with the 
Department, and the number of notifications that are made, among other data sets, and 
publishes the report on its website, as required by the New York City Administrative Code 
§ 9-131. The public reports can be found here:  
https://www.nyc.gov/site/doc/data/statistics-and-compliance.page
 
 
While an agency wide audit is impractical, the Department will consider targeted reviews 
consistent with Recommendation #4.     
 
7. In accordance with the requirements of §10 -178(d) of the New York City Administrative Code, 
report any previously unknown or unreported civil immigration enforcement-related requests to the 
Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs. 
 
DOC accepted this recommendation and responded as follows:  
 
The Department submits all reports required by §10 -178(d) of the New York City 
Administrative Code, to the Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs. 
Investigation into CIB Investigator Assisting with Immigration Enforcement September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 16  
 
 
 
 
VII.  Addenda  
 
 
Addendum A










































Addendum B
FROM: COMMISSIONER'S ORDER         MSG#: 2025-003123 
TO  :                              SENT: 05/14/25      2111  HRS 
SUBJ: 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
TELETYPE ORDER NO.    HQ -00899-0  
 
DATE      MAY 14, 2025 
 
TO        COMMANDING OFFICERS, FACILITIES AND DIVISIONS 
 
FROM      LYNELLE MAGINLEY-LIDDIE, COMMISSIONER 
 
SUBJECT   OPERATIONS ORDER 9/19, “INTERACTIONS WITH FEDERAL IMMIGRATION 
          AUTHORITIES” 
 
***IMMEDIATE ATTENTION*** 
 
      1.  OPERATIONS ORDER 9/19, “INTERACTIONS WITH FEDERAL IMMIGRATION 
AUTHORITIES,” ISSUED ON MARCH 29, 2019, REMAINS IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECT. 
THIS OPERATIONS ORDER GOVERNS ALL DEPARTMENTAL INTERACTIONS WITH FEDERAL 
IMMIGRATION AUTHORITIES IN COMPLIANCE WITH CURRENT LOCAL LAW. 
 
      2.  THE COMMANDING OFFICERS OF FACILITIES AND DIVISIONS SHALL ENSURE 
FULL COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS TELETYPE. 
 
      3.  PURSUANT TO LOCAL LAW 228 OF 2017, CODIFIED AS NYC ADMINISTRATIVE 
CODE § 9-131(7), DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL ARE PROHIBITED FROM USING ON-DUTY TIME 
OR DEPARTMENT RESOURCES OF ANY KIND, INCLUDING INFORMATION OBTAINED THROUGH 
THE COURSE OF THEIR DUTIES, TO DISCLOSE INFORMATION AVAILABLE TO THEM SOLELY 
IN THEIR OFFICIAL CAPACITY IN RESPONSE TO FEDERAL IMMIGRATION INQUIRIES. THIS 
INCLUDES COMMUNICATION WITH FEDERAL IMMIGRATION AUTHORITIES REGARDING ANY 
INDIVIDUAL’S INCARCERATION STATUS, RELEASE DATE, COURT APPEARANCE DATES, OR 
ANY OTHER INFORMATION RELATED TO INDIVIDUALS IN THE DEPARTMENT’S CUSTODY, 
EXCEPT WHEN:  
 
A. THE INDIVIDUAL HAS BEEN CONVICTED OF A VIOLENT OR SERIOUS CRIME, 
AS DEFINED IN NYC ADMINISTRATIVE CODE § 9-131(7), OR IDENTIFIED AS 
A POSSIBLE MATCH IN THE TERRORIST SCREENING DATABASE; 
 
B. THE COMMUNICATION IS UNRELATED TO THE ENFORCEMENT OF CIVIL 
IMMIGRATION LAWS; OR 
 
C. DISCLOSURE IS OTHERWISE REQUIRED BY LAW. 
 
      4.  THE CUSTODY MANAGEMENT AND CENTRALIZED MOVEMENT UNIT (CMCMU), IN 
CONSULTATION WITH THE LEGAL DIVISION, IS SOLELY AUTHORIZED TO DETERMINE 
Addendum C
WHETHER THE DEPARTMENT IS PERMITTED UNDER LOCAL LAW TO COMMUNICATE WITH 
FEDERAL IMMIGRATION AUTHORITIES. 
 
      5.  IF ANY DEPARTMENT STAFF RECEIVES A REQUEST FROM ANY LOCAL, STATE OR 
FEDERAL AGENCY FOR ANY INDIVIDUAL’S INCARCERATION STATUS, RELEASE DATE, COURT 
APPEARANCE DATES, OR ANY OTHER INFORMATION RELATED TO INDIVIDUALS IN THE 
DEPARTMENT’S CUSTODY, AND THE REQUEST APPEARS RELATED TO THE ENFORCEMENT OF 
FEDERAL IMMIGRATION LAWS, THE STAFF MEMBER MUST IMMEDIATELY REFER THE REQUEST 
TO CMCMU AND CONTACT THE LEGAL DIVISION. 
 
      6.  FOR THE FULL AND COMPLETE POLICY, REFER TO OPERATIONS ORDER 9/19, 
“INTERACTIONS WITH FEDERAL IMMIGRATION AUTHORITIES.” 
 
      7.  THE COMMANDING OFFICERS OF FACILITIES AND DIVISIONS ARE DIRECTED TO 
ENSURE THAT: 
 
A. ALL PERSONNEL ARE APPRISED OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS TELETYPE ORDER 
AND INSTRUCTED ACCORDINGLY. 
 
B. THE CONTENTS OF THIS TELETYPE IS READ AT TWENTY-ONE (21) 
CONSECUTIVE ROLL CALLS. 
 
 
AUTHORITY: 
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER 
LML/MB 
 
 
 