1
How to Advance and Strengthen the Plan to Close Rikers
THE INDISPENSABLE ROLE 
OF JUDGES IN CURTAILING 
EXCESSIVE PRETRIAL 
DETENTION AND CLOSING 
RIKERS ISLAND
APRIL 2025

The Indispensable Role of Judges in Curtailing Excessive Pretrial Detention and Closing Rikers Island
1
Every day in New York City courtrooms, judges make crucial decisions that determine whether the New 
York City jail population increases or decreases. If the City is to meet its legal and moral obligation to 
close the atrocious jails on Rikers Island, judges must change an array of pretrial practices that do not 
advance either public safety or the statutory goal of assuring return to court. Court administrators, City 
policymakers, and City and State legislators also have essential roles to play in aiding judges who wish 
to make sound decisions by offering them credible data, regular training, reliable decision-making tools, 
and expanded pretrial options other than bail and jail.
For the benefit of all parties invested in erasing the stain of Rikers from New York City, this policy brief 
summarizes research findings since the implementation of bail reform in 2020 and offers concomitant 
recommendations directed to parties with influence over judicial decision-making. New York has a 
unique opportunity to become a national leader in pretrial justice. We urge swift action to that effect.
The Harmful Impact of Pretrial Detention in 
New York City
As of February 2025, almost 85% of the more than 6,800 people in the City’s jails every 
day are held pretrial, while awaiting the outcome of their criminal cases. Jail sentences 
account for another 8% of the jail population, with the remaining categories (e.g. held on parole 
violation or awaiting transfer to state prison) combining for just over 7%.
Excessive pretrial detention fundamentally weakens the legal system’s legitimacy. In 1987, 
the Supreme Court ruled, “In our society, liberty is the norm, and detention prior to trial or without trial 
is the carefully limited exception.” Unjustified detention is tantamount to premature punishment in the 
absence of a conviction—undermining the bedrock principle that people are presumed innocent as 
long as their cases are pending. 
Mirroring findings elsewhere, studies from New York City indicate that pretrial detention coerces 
people to plead guilty, leaving them with significantly higher conviction rates than similarly situated 
people who are released. The same research found that after controlling for other factors, detention 
increases both the likelihood and length of jail and prison sentences.
Pretrial detention also extracts a devastating human toll—especially from society’s most 
vulnerable members. People incarcerated in the nation’s jails and prisons, and specifically at 
Rikers, suffer disproportionately from mental illness. Pretrial detention only exacerbates mental health 
problems, especially when people with mental illnesses are held for prolonged periods—a common 
occurrence due to New York City’s well-documented case processing delays.
Detaining people can precipitate the loss of housing, employment, and future income—and can 
aggravate pre existing housing and employment instability. A recent study in New York City found 
that people detained before trial were 420% more likely than released people to become homeless, 
74% more likely to lose their jobs, and 41% more likely to experience adverse effects on their ability to 
provide for their children. 

2
These harmful effects of pretrial detention ripple out to thousands of children and families, 
predominantly families of color. While the effects of a parent’s pre-trial detention specifically are not 
well-studied, parental incarceration is included among the CDC’s adverse childhood experiences 
(ACES) and the negative effects of the criminal justice process (including the stigma this brings with it) 
on children’s well-being, education and health are significant and well-documented. Furthermore, the 
trauma and violence experienced during pre-trial detention can have lasting effects that whole families 
grapple with for years to come.
The repercussions are especially horrifying at Rikers Island. Longstanding inhumane 
conditions have only grown more violent and deadly in recent years. From FY 2011 to FY 2024, 
incidents and allegations of use of force by correction officers skyrocketed almost sevenfold. Since 
2020, the City’s jails have seen significant spikes in violence and failures by correction staff to bring 
people to scheduled medical appointments.
Shocking news reports point to decades of sexual assaults by correction officers and medical 
personnel against women held at Rikers. Gothamist reporters found that during a one-year window, 
women filed over 700 civil lawsuits against the Department of Correction (DOC) alleging sexual abuse, 
accounting for more than 55% of all lawsuits filed across the City under the Adult Survivors Act.
More than ever, Rikers warehouses people with mental health and housing needs, who are far better 
served in their communities. Of those now in jail, 57% have needed mental health services during their 
incarceration. In February 2025, 21% of those held had been diagnosed with a serious mental illness, 
up from 16% in August 2021. Additionally, Correctional Health Services reports that as of February 
2025, 24% had been diagnosed with an opioid disorder, and 26% reported they were homeless at the 
time of their incarceration and/or likely to become homeless at the time of discharge.
No Benefit to Public Safety
Contrary to widespread misinformation in the media, detaining people before trial does 
not promote public safety. Research in jurisdictions nationwide has consistently found that pretrial 
detention does not affect crime or recidivism, with some studies finding that pretrial detention actually 
increases recidivism.
The same is true in New York. Using a five-year NYC dataset from 2009 to 2013, researchers found 
that while detention lowered re-arrest rates during the pretrial period itself—an inherent result of 
temporarily removing people from their communities—detention’s harmful social and psychological 
effects increased re-arrest rates in the two years after case disposition.
A more recent study found that people released pretrial in New York City after bail reform 
(because their charges became ineligible for bail) had a significantly lower two-year re-
arrest rate than similarly situated people who were assigned bail or detention before bail 
reform. As for those still eligible for bail, the same study found no recidivism effect in either direction 
when judges used their discretion to release people versus setting bail or remand. Another study found 
bail reform had no net effect on recidivism in suburban and upstate New York. Two additional studies 
found that bail reform had no effect on crime rates in either direction in New York City or across the 
entire State. 
The Indispensable Role of Judges in Curtailing Excessive Pretrial Detention and Closing Rikers Island

3
Beyond New York, bail reforms did not alter crime or recidivism in Cook County, Illinois; they 
decreased misdemeanor crime (with no effect on felony crime) in New Jersey; and they decreased new 
criminal cases over three years in Harris County, Texas.
Unfortunately, some sources have undermined an honest, data-driven public discourse by ignoring 
credible research or misstating or cherry-picking certain results—but, overall, an unbiased summary of 
available facts from the Brennan Center shows that detaining people pretrial is not making New Yorkers 
safer.
The Improper Nexus Between Bail and Jail
Often overlooked, the historical purpose of cash bail was never to serve as an instrument 
of incarceration; the original idea was to promote pretrial release with a money incentive 
(by having “skin in the game”) to return to court. Yet across the country, courts routinely set 
bail irrespective of people’s ability to pay it. In response, courts in California, Louisiana, Maryland, and 
Texas all recently ruled that judges must assess and consider people’s finances before setting bail. 
A judge in Dutchess County, New York, even issued a non-binding decision that a failure to consider 
people’s ability to pay violates the due process and equal protection clauses of both the U.S. and New 
York State constitutions.
New York’s bail reform law limits ambiguity by explicitly requiring judges to “consider 
and take into account” people’s “individual financial circumstances” and ability to post 
bail without “undue hardship.” The reform also required that judges offer people the opportunity 
to post bail via a partially secured bond (involving upfront payment of no more than 10% of the 
total) or an unsecured bond (involving no upfront payment at all), and that judges consider people’s 
financial ability to post one of these bonds. (A person posting these “alternative” forms of bails is still 
responsible for the balance if the individual facing charges absconds.) Previous research suggests 
that court attendance rates are as high with partially secured bonds as with cash bail. Unfortunately, 
the evidence points to poor implementation of every single one of bail reform’s “ability to pay” 
provisions (see next page, “Bail as De Facto Remand”).
Vast Racial and Neighborhood Disparities
Black and Hispanic New Yorkers disproportionately suffer from the pernicious effects 
of bail and jail. Combined, Black and Hispanic New Yorkers make up close to 90% of the City’s jail 
population. Black people alone account for nearly 60% of the jail population, compared to just 23% of 
the City’s general population. In relative terms, Black people are currently jailed at a rate 11 times higher 
than that of white people. Recent studies show that Black-white and Hispanic-white disparities have 
both increased since 2019.
Pretrial detention also disproportionately impacts predominantly Black and Hispanic communities. Of 
the City’s 178 zip codes, just 40 zip codes (23%) accounted for 60% of 2021 jail admissions. In 90% of 
these 40 zip codes, the population was majority or plurality Black or Hispanic. 
The Indispensable Role of Judges in Curtailing Excessive Pretrial Detention and Closing Rikers Island

4
Furthermore, in 92% of all zip codes citywide, Black residents made up a higher share of the zip code’s 
jail admissions than its general population (see related maps).
Evidence indicates that the status quo’s steep racial disparities stem partly from judges’ 
decisions. In 2021, the City’s judges assigned bail or remand to 56% of Black, 51% of Hispanic, and 
43% of white people facing violent felony charges—precisely the types of charges where judges have 
retained the most discretion under bail reform. In 2022, another study found that even after controlling 
for people’s individual and case characteristics, judges in New York City assigned bail or remand 8 
percentage points more for Black and 6 percentage points more for Hispanic than white people.
The latter study also found that Black, Hispanic, and white people had statistically 
identical rates of failure to appear in court—refuting any notion that judges’ racially 
disparate decisions have a defensible empirical basis. Echoing these results, the City’s 
validated release assessment recommends virtually identical percentages of people from each racial/
ethnic group for release on recognizance. Therefore, racial disparities in judges’ decisions can only 
occur because judges are substituting their discretion for the science-based recommendations of this 
assessment.
Assessing Current Judicial Practices
Besides contributing to racial inequality, judges’ decisions may produce excessive 
pretrial detention for all groups in three ways:
1.  Overuse of Bail: Judges may set bail (or remand people directly to jail) unnecessarily.
2.  Bail as De Facto Remand: Judges may fail to make bail affordable when setting it.
3.  Protracted Length of Stay: Judges may permit case delays that prolong the detention period.
All three of these things are taking place. It is worth emphasizing, however, that judges are far from 
the only relevant actors. Prosecutors’ unwarranted or excessive bail requests, and delays by the 
prosecution or defense in turning over discovery, filing timely motions, or completing other trial-
readiness tasks play a role. Yet judges are the ultimate decision-makers in their courtrooms.
1.  Overuse of Bail and Detention
Bail Practices in Conflict with Low Rates of Failure to Appear (FTA). A recent study found 
that in 2022, just 16% of people released before trial in NYC missed any of their court dates. After 
controlling for other factors, people charged with violent felonies had a lower FTA rate (14%) than other 
charges. Yet the City’s judges used their discretion to set bail or remand people charged with violent 
felonies nearly half the time (49%). Researchers estimated that given their charge and criminal history 
characteristics, the people whom NYC judges detained would have had an FTA rate of 18%—nearly as 
low as the people judges released. 
Previous research suggests that unguided judicial discretion tends to result in over-detention. A recent 
study in a different jurisdiction found that a validated assessment outperformed the judgment of 90% 
of judges at assessing future risk and making decisions around bail and detention. In fact, 70% of 
judges made decisions whose predictive accuracy regarding re-arrest proved no better than flipping a 
coin. 
The Indispensable Role of Judges in Curtailing Excessive Pretrial Detention and Closing Rikers Island

5 The Indispensable Role of Judges in Curtailing Excessive Pretrial Detention and Closing Rikers Island
These findings do not reflect on judges’ legal acumen. Judges are not trained to be experts in the 
factors associated with FTA or re-arrest—the outcomes we nonetheless ask judges nationwide 
to assess every single day (though under New York law judges may only consider FTA). What the 
research literature does call into question is the tendency among many judges to make insufficient use 
of decision-making tools that could help them make significantly better judgments and decisions.
In the status quo, even as the City’s release assessment would yield fairer and more empirically 
sound outcomes, judges often override it. One study found that when this assessment specifically 
recommended release on recognizance (ROR) for people charged with violent felonies, judges set ROR 
only 44% of the time. Even for nonviolent felonies recommended for ROR, judges set ROR just 67% of 
the time.
Reversion to Bail and Detention in Mid-2020. From the first to second half of 2020, judges swung 
toward setting bail significantly more often in the exact same types of cases. Some have hypothesized 
this change reflected judges’ public safety concerns at a time when serious crime was increasing 
in cities nationwide. Yet as indicated above, the hard evidence never linked 2020 crime increases 
to pretrial release policies—and the State’s judges may not legally base their pretrial decisions on 
perceptions of public safety risk. Supporting New York’s approach, in other states where judges may 
consider public safety risk, their perceptions of who is “high risk” are often mistaken; and as cited 
above, these mistaken perceptions generally err in the direction of over-detention.
Disparate Decision-Making from Judge to Judge. Studies in New York City and other 
jurisdictions have found that judges vary substantially in their pretrial decision-making on comparable 
cases—both pre-reform and post-reform. A study released last year found that after controlling for 
the charges and criminal histories in each case, 14 NYC judges’ highly disproportionate use of pretrial 
detention over two and a half years resulted in an additional 580 people detained and 154 added years 
of pretrial detention, compared to their peers. While this study named the “most carceral judges,” 
it also drew attention to a larger systemic failure: given the considerable discretion judges have 
retained at arraignments and their demonstrated wide variability in exercising that discretion, 
NYC arraignment courts produce unreliable and therefore inherently unfair decisions that rely 
excessively on the “luck of the draw” of which judge arraigns a given person’s case.
2.  Misuse of Bail as De Facto Remand
Judges’ decisions to set bail amounts that people are unable to pay operate as “de facto 
remand”—pretrial detention under the false guise of providing a chance at release on bail.
Increasing Bail Amounts. Since bail reform went into effect, bail amounts grew higher, not lower. 
From 2019 to 2021, NYC judges’ average cash bail amounts rose from $19,000 to $30,000, and median 
bail rose from $7,500 to $10,000. (When breaking out bail amounts separately for misdemeanor and 
felony bail cases, the increases from 2019 onward are more modest in magnitude.) Illustrating the gulf 
between current practice and what is affordable, one study cited the example of the Bronx, where one 
in five cash bails exceeded the borough’s median household income of $41,432 for an entire year.
Low Bail Payment Rates. Multiple studies also found that bail-posting rates in the City have 
declined since the pre-reform 2019 year. In 2022, just 9% of people assigned bail in the City could 
pay it at arraignment, and even after five days, only 18% had posted bail. An upstate study reported no 
courtroom discussion of what people could pay in 73% of observed bail cases, and judges sought to 
arrive at an affordable amount in only 8% of cases.

6
Obstacles to Bail Payment with a Partially Secured Bond (PSB). First, evidence indicates that 
judges often inflate the total amount on a PSB—driving up the required upfront payment. An analysis 
conducted for this brief found that in 2023, PSB totals in NYC were a median of two times higher 
than cash totals in the same cases—with 44% of bail cases seeing a PSB set three or more times 
higher than cash and 20% seeing a PSB set five or more times higher. Another new study echoed 
these findings: Researchers found that contrary to legislators’ intent, judges did not make a PSB the 
most affordable option in 82% of bail cases from 2020 to 2023. Instead, obtaining bail money from a 
commercial bond company was the most affordable option in 78% of the cases. Second, past reporting 
found that judges at times refuse to honor people’s efforts to post a PSB even if they swear to a signed 
affidavit accepting responsibility for the balance if the individual absconds. Perhaps reflecting these 
roadblocks, a 2022 analysis found that only 20% of successful bail postings in the NYC Supreme Court 
involved PSBs. Together, these practices make it harder for people to use PSBs, steering them toward 
private bail bond companies that charge nonrefundable fees. Third, research conducted for this brief 
indicates that judges rarely accept bail via an unsecured bond (USB), offered in 0.9% of 2023 bail cases. 
On top of the impediments imposed upon people facing charges and their families, PSBs and USBs 
impose greater administrative burdens on judges and court staff than cash bail or commercial 
bonds do. PSBs and USBs require bail payers and defense attorneys to complete complex paperwork 
and attend a court hearing at which they must swear to their representations. In turn, judges and court 
staff must interrupt their daily schedules to preside over these procedures. By contrast, when cash bail 
or a commercial bond is set, people can simply post bail at a payment window or obtain a commercial 
bond bail by having a private company handle the administrative work. The inefficiencies to courts may 
partly explain why people’s legal right to a PSB or USB is routinely compromised.
To align with legislators’ intent and prevent courts from steering people toward exploitative commercial 
bonds, the New York Court System must make PSBs and USBs more accessible by streamlining 
procedures and eliminating unnecessary barriers that make these options harder to use than cash bail 
or private bail bonds.
3.  Protracted Length of Stay
Felony Case Processing Times Well Above National and State Standards. Mirroring a widely 
adopted national standard, New York has long mandated that its trial courts resolve indicted felonies 
within 180 days. Yet even before the onset of recent delays, just 35% of indicted felonies met this 
180-day standard in 2019, with only two-thirds of indictments resolved even after a year. Two recent 
analyses drew a direct line from growing court delays to ballooning lengths of stay for people held in 
pretrial detention at Rikers.
Limited Use of Effective Case Management Practices. Older research uncovered a multitude of 
reasons for the City’s case processing delays— including the practices of judges, prosecutors, defense 
attorneys, the Department of Correction, and the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (the latter of 
which is known for untimely DNA testing)—many of which undoubtedly persist today. However, a 
groundbreaking multisite study from the National Center for State Courts underscores the preeminent 
role of judges. Researchers found that outcomes were better in jurisdictions in which judges 
proactively triaged simple versus complex cases at the first court date; curtailed lengthy adjournments 
between dates; held attorneys strictly accountable for on-time discovery, motions, and trial-readiness; 
and scheduled case conferences to discuss bottlenecks and plea options. A pilot project in Brooklyn 
adapted these practices, leading 80% of indicted felonies to be resolved in 10 months, compared to 
60% for a matched comparison group. 
The Indispensable Role of Judges in Curtailing Excessive Pretrial Detention and Closing Rikers Island

7
Recommendations to Improve Pretrial Decision-
Making
Our recommendations are listed concisely and follow from the research cited above. Some of 
our recommendations draw explicitly from a range of previous publications identifying strategies 
for reducing pretrial detention in New York City through better judicial decision-making. In many 
ways, these recommendations build on and complement those of the recently released Lippman 
Commission report, an excellent resource for ideas around mental health, housing, and other diversion 
investments.
A)  Court Administrators (and Individual Judges)
New York’s Chief Judge, Rowan Wilson, was only inducted two years ago. Promising early steps under 
his leadership include instituting expanded judicial training on bail reform; endorsing the Treatment 
Not Jail Act, which would increase access to the City’s effective mental health courts; and supporting 
“Second Look” legislation, which would shorten certain prison sentences. And Chief Administrative 
Judge Joseph Zayas has written about the drivers of case processing delays and offered ideas to 
address them. Recently announced protocols aiming to reduce felony case delays suggest that the 
Office of Court Administration (OCA) intends to enact some of these ideas. We hope that OCA under 
Chief Judge Wilson and Chief Administrative Judge Zayas will continue implementing helpful reforms 
and supporting promising legislation.
1.  Promote Culture Change via Training and Information Sharing. Partner with City agencies 
to implement a rigorous system of live and online judicial trainings and bench card dissemination on key 
topics (as proposed above), and pursue other avenues for sharing critical research with judges:
	
►Value of the Release Assessment: Ensure judges are acquainted with evidence supporting the 
validity of the City’s release assessment and encourage greater adherence to it, especially for violent 
felonies that are nearly all eligible for bail—given the reality that limited use of this assessment is 
presently leading to over-detention, racial disparities, and variable decisions from judge to judge
	
►Role of Race: Share research demonstrating that people’s race and ethnicity have no credible link to 
FTA, despite a reality of significant racial disparities in current bail and detention decisions.
	
►First Arrests: As recommended elsewhere, highlight for judges that research finds people with 
no prior arrest pose an especially low FTA risk even when violence is alleged. Judges should also 
consider that FTA risk remains low for people with only a single prior arrest or conviction and only 
increases to any appreciable degree when there are multiple pending cases, prior misdemeanors 
(especially five or more), or previous missed court appearances. It is, furthermore, imperative to 
share with judges that people’s FTA risk does not increase merely because the current charge is a 
violent felony; to the contrary, in all regions of the state including the city, a violent felony charge 
is associated with a lower FTA risk. Lastly, it is important for judges to be secure in the knowledge 
that even when people are charged with a bail-eligible violent felony, they see significant recidivism 
reductions when they are released if it is a first-time arrest.
	
►Legal Purpose of Bail: Reinforce that pretrial decisions are solely to ensure return to court and that, 
under State law, judges may not base decisions on their perceptions of public safety risk. Encourage 
setting ROR in cases where the empirical evidence points to little or no FTA risk.
The Indispensable Role of Judges in Curtailing Excessive Pretrial Detention and Closing Rikers Island

8 The Indispensable Role of Judges in Curtailing Excessive Pretrial Detention and Closing Rikers Island
2.  Revamp the Administration of Partially Secured and Unsecured Bonds. Offer guidance 
to judges on the use of partially secured bonds (PSBs) and unsecured bonds (USBs) in tandem with 
systemic reforms to ease the burdens judges and court staff now face when administering these bonds.
	
►Study Current Obstacles and Make Recommendations: Convene NYC judges, defense attorneys, 
prosecutors, and experts to determine structural solutions. These could include, for each borough’s 
criminal court, consolidating PSB and USB hearings in a single courtroom with sufficient time and 
expertise to process these bonds, creating a way to pay PSB and USB during nights and weekends, 
and disseminating advisory principles to all judges for setting PSBs and USBs—for example, PSB 
totals comparable to cash totals on the same cases and automatic honoring of people’s efforts to pay 
PSBs and USBs absent objections by prosecutors.1
	
►More Options Besides Cash and Commercial Bonds: Remind judges that New York has nine 
forms of bail and there is no limit to the number of these forms that judges may make available. 
Encourage judges to offer people and their families and friends more ways to post bail—but 
to limit poor people’s exposure to exploitative, non-refundable fees, discourage reliance on 
commercial bonds. 
	
►Unsecured Bonds: Recall that the reformed bail statute draws explicit attention to unsecured bonds 
as a form of bail judges may order in lieu of a PSB. Encourage judges to set USBs in more cases and, 
as a lawful process matter recommended by the NYC Comptroller’s Office, “direct judges to first 
consider and state any reasons for not setting an unsecured bond.” 
3.  Prepare Judges Newly Assigned to Arraignment. Ensure that all judges newly assigned 
to arraignments—whether for a one-off evening, night, or weekend shift or a long-term daytime 
arraignment assignment—have access to key information through training or reference documents. 
Provide live or recorded training by researchers and experts concerning the release assessment, 
factors that demonstrably do and don’t predict FTA, and findings from credible studies in New York and 
nationwide around pretrial detention, crime, and recidivism. Consider requiring that judges complete an 
online training on relevant legal and empirical issues before they sit in arraignments.
4. Hold Mandatory Bail Reviews. Implement “second look” bail reviews, including at a minimum: 
	
►Early Rehearing When People Cannot Pay Bail: Hold an automatic bail review before a dedicated 
Supreme Court judge in each borough when people cannot swiftly post bail (when they are detained 
for more than 5-7 days). Also, pass a neglected legislative provision from the Governor’s FY 2019 
budget bill that required such a rehearing—after which people must be “reasonably able to pay” any 
resulting bail. 
	
►Standard and Goals Rehearing: Hold a pretrial detention hearing for everyone still detained 
180 days after indictment (either on bail or remand), honoring the State’s official benchmark to 
resolve indicted felonies by this juncture. At this hearing, judges should be encouraged to lower 
bail or release people with conditions like supervised release—potentially alongside intensive case 
management (ICM), treatment attendance, housing linkages, or other individualized supports that 
can be identified by a needs assessment.
1 As a matter of law, judges may only reject bail payers’ representations if the prosecutor first raises the issue and, based on 
a further inquiry, if the judge also finds “reasonable cause” to believe that the individual wrongfully or illegally possesses the 
money they propose to use.

9
5.  Reform Case Processing. Promote best practices for managing felony caseloads, such as:
	
►Training: Have experts at the National Center for State Courts (or other experts) train all judges on 
case management practices that have been proven to be effective and ineffective across the country. 
	
►Brooklyn Model: Adapt the Brooklyn pilot to Supreme Courts in each borough in ways feasible for 
each borough’s resources, culture, and practices.
	
►Discrete Reforms: Swiftly adopt one or more individual elements of good case processing (e.g., 
regular case conferences, expedited discovery, or adjournments capped at time needed to complete 
between-appearance tasks in lieu of generic 30-40-day intervals). In this regard, OCA has already 
taken an important step forward with its announced new case processing strategies; they include 
“scheduling orders” and “case conferences,” discrete reforms that align with best practices according 
to both national research and findings from the Brooklyn pilot.
	
►Homicide Delay Task Force: It is well understood that homicides cannot be resolved as quickly as 
other cases. Prior New York City research indicates that homicides average 1.8 times longer to reach 
a disposition than other violent felonies and 2.6 times longer than nonviolent felonies. Yet research 
also calls into question the need for homicides to require over 20 months of case processing time, as 
they have in the City. To address the unnecessary reality that murder charges presently account for 
close to 900 people held in pretrial detention, with attempted murders accounting for nearly another 
600, launch a task force to identify the obstacles and propose solutions to shrink their pretrial 
processing time. At a minimum, the task force could include judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, 
city officials, and experts on case processing data, as well as people skilled at meeting facilitation to 
ensure the development of viable strategies and plans to promptly implement them.
6.  Benchmarks. Enforce target performance standards for the city’s court system and monitor 
progress in achieving them:
	
►Bail-Setting: Given documented high rates of return to court (e.g., only 16% of people in 2022 failed 
to appear), set a commensurate benchmark for how often bail should be set on violent felonies and 
other bail-eligible cases: e.g., bail or remand used in no more than 20% of cases.
	
►Bail Payment: Given documented low rates of bail payment (e.g., 9% at arraignment in 2022), 
encourage more frequently setting bail at an amount that people can pay: e.g., a bail-posting rate of 
50% at arraignment, 75% within a week, and 90% within a month.
	
►Detention Time Limits: Prioritize capping pretrial detention stays at a maximum of 180 days; to help 
get there, set an adjournment length cap of no higher than 4 weeks between appearances. 
7.  Make Public Data Improvements: Based on consultation between the State’s Office of Court 
Administration and Division of Criminal Justice Services, make public additional case-level (i.e. raw) 
pretrial data semi-annually, including: (1) bail eligibility status (yes/no); (2) any prior arrest; (3) number 
of prior warrants for failure to appear; (4) number of pending cases; (5) prosecutor’s requested release 
condition and, if bail, prosecutor’s requested bail amounts (by form of bail); and (6) number of bail 
review hearings for people detained and outcome of each such hearing (continuation of prior decision, 
revised bail amounts, ROR, supervised release, etc.).
The Indispensable Role of Judges in Curtailing Excessive Pretrial Detention and Closing Rikers Island

10
8.  Establish a Central Point of Contact. Appoint a senior Office of Court Administration (OCA) 
attorney or a Deputy Chief Administrative Judge with relevant experience and a commitment to the 
issues to oversee all court policy related to closing Rikers, and authorize this leader to seek and act on 
counsel from a wide range of partners and experts. 
B)  City Agencies
Although not a part of the court system, New York City agencies have an important role to play in 
pretrial reform. Through the mayoral administration’s ability to invest in new programs and tools, 
conduct or fund research, and convene stakeholders, it can accomplish a great deal to help judges in 
their work. 
1.  Offer Training and Analysis. Provide judges with essential information via formal training and 
regular retraining on the science and use of the City’s: (1) release assessment, (2) supervised release 
model, and 3) available Alternative To Incarceration Programs. Create monthly and quarterly status 
reports on the effectiveness of these programs to share with judges so that they understand the 
programs’ impact. 
2.  Disseminate Bench Cards. Work with court administrators to place “bench cards” (concise but 
information-rich cheat sheets) in every courtroom reminding judges of key facts about, respectively: (1) 
the release assessment; (2) supervised release; (3) electronic monitoring; (4) strategies for assessing 
ability to pay bail; and (5) nationally and locally documented effective practices to reduce case delay.
3.  Prioritize the Release Assessment: Besides training, take additional concerted action, including: 
	
►Public Dashboard: Create an information-rich dashboard updated monthly or quarterly that shows 
citywide and borough-wide rates of adherence to the release assessment—especially for violent 
felonies and other bail-eligible cases—with breakdowns by borough, charge severity and type, and 
demographics. 
	
►Data Transparency: Make de-identified case-level release assessment, charge, demographic, 
arraignment outcome, and FTA data public, enabling other researchers to independently analyze it.
	
►Revalidation: Study and, if needed, update the release assessment to ensure the City’s ongoing 
ability to present it to judges as a state-of-the-art, fair, and reliable decision-making aid. (Note: State 
law requires all pretrial assessments to be “regularly revalidated.”) Contrary to current practice, 
consider validating and using the release assessment for all cases, including homicide cases.
4.  Launch an Ability to Pay Assessment. Develop and implement a science-based ability to pay 
assessment. Administer it after a judge sets bail or beforehand at the court’s request, and promptly 
notify the court of the findings—potentially leading to a “second call” if the individual has not yet been 
transported to jail. Report data on the tool’s results, the gap between these results and judges’ bail 
amounts, and bail-posting rates, with key breakdowns (e.g., by borough, charge, and demographics).
The Indispensable Role of Judges in Curtailing Excessive Pretrial Detention and Closing Rikers Island

11
5.  Expand Pretrial Options for Judges. Fully fund expanded intensive options besides bail—
especially given research that certain high-risk populations (e.g., pending case or recent prior violent 
felony arrest) pose an outsize recidivism risk:
	
►Intensive Case Management (ICM): Expand the City’s underfunded pretrial ICM model to all 
arraignment shifts and all five boroughs, train judges in how it works, and assure judges that all 
eligible people will receive it.2
	
►Supervised Release Plus Treatment: In lieu of bail, remind judges that they may legally order 
“mandatory programming”—supervised release PLUS treatment or social services—should an 
individualized assessment indicate that a person faces significant barriers to court attendance, which 
certain treatment programs or services could address.
6.  Assess People’s Needs. For cases posing a modicum of FTA risk, invest in the capacity to 
conduct a holistic pre-arraignment needs assessment to identify individualized community-based 
services capable of mitigating risk. In addition, conduct a needs assessment once people are detained—
leading to a report formally submitted to the court (and to the defense and prosecution) concerning 
viable release options with services.
7.  Convene Stakeholders. Use the City’s unique ability to convene system and community 
stakeholders and experts to spur productive dialogue and fresh strategic planning. For starters, with a 
revamped membership and well-organized action agendas, re-launch the Closing Rikers Implementation 
Task Force (2017-2019) and Justice Reboot initiative (2015-2016), the latter of which previously provided 
a key forum for tackling bottlenecks in felony case processing. Work to productively build on a novel 
Review Program launched over the past year, featuring individualized assessments of detained 
individuals. Encourage the judiciary, prosecution, defense bar, corrections, mayor’s office, and other 
implicated agencies to forge agreements for releasing specific individuals unnecessarily detained before 
trial; and to this end, consider establishing the research-based Population Review Team model in each 
borough.
B)  City Legislatures
State legislators passed New York’s groundbreaking bail reform law, which reduced bail setting and 
pretrial detention from what they would have been, while reducing recidivism and having no effect 
on crime in the City. In turn, the City Council can take a number of steps to move the reform process 
along.
1.  Mandate an Ability to Pay Assessment. Pass a City law requiring the Mayor’s Office of Criminal 
Justice (MOCJ), or a group contracted by MOCJ, to develop and administer a valid ability to pay 
assessment (subject to defense consent) at the court’s request or, otherwise, immediately after the court 
sets bail; mandate prompt notification to the court of the assessment’s findings; and provide for public 
reporting (see above, recommendation #1d). 
2 The Intensive Case Management (ICM) model is a supervised release track designed for high-risk people. While this 
track’s existence offers the prospect of increasing judges’ confidence in ordering supervision in lieu of bail, the City to-date 
is only making it available to a fraction of eligible people in Manhattan and Queens. Even in those boroughs, judges cannot 
currently trust that the validly high-risk people they assign to supervised release will always receive this model.
The Indispensable Role of Judges in Curtailing Excessive Pretrial Detention and Closing Rikers Island

12
2.  Track Racial Disparities. Pass a City Council reporting bill that would require the Mayor’s Office 
of Equity and Racial Justice to issue an annual report providing the following for all racial and ethnic 
groups and with further breakdowns by borough, charge severity, bail eligibility status, and release 
assessment recommendation:
a. Pretrial Release Decisions: Number and percentage for each respective subgroup assigned: (1) 
released on recognizance, (2) supervised release, (3) other non-monetary conditions, (4) bail (omitting 
$1.00 bail), and (5) remand.
b. Bail Amounts: Average and median cash, commercial bond, and partially secured bond total.
c. Bail-Posting: Bail payment rates at arraignment and within one week.
d. Forms of Bail: Of all cases assigned bail, number and percentage offered each of the nine possible 
forms of bail; and of those posting bail, number and percentage of bail payers posting each form.
The Staggering Financial and Human Cost of 
Incarceration at Rikers
Considering this brief’s evidence of unwarranted pretrial detention in the status quo, it is 
astonishingly wasteful that according to the NYC Comptroller’s Office, taxpayers doled 
out $507,317 per person per year to house people at Rikers in FY 2023 (up from $144,176 
in FY 2011). The City’s Preliminary FY 26 Budget includes over $2.8 billion for the Department of 
Correction—money that could be more productively spent on human needs such as mental health, 
housing, education, and crime prevention. While the City blithely invests billions in Rikers every 
year, a court-appointed federal monitor has released over 50 reports and letters since 2014 that 
portray a correctional system defined by unremitting mismanagement, dysfunction, violence, and 
dehumanization.
 ********************************************************************************* 
Ultimately, the cost of needless pretrial detention borne by taxpayers parallels the heartbreaking 
human cost if New York City does not seize the opportunity its leaders and residents possess 
to launch wide-ranging, data-driven reforms starting today. Since judges’ pretrial decisions 
determine how many New Yorkers continue to languish needlessly at Rikers, it is imperative that 
policymakers launch strategies expressly designed to improve judicial outcomes.
The following organizations contributed to and support the findings and recommendations 
outlined above: Freedom Agenda, Data Collaborative for Justice, Vera Institute of Justice, 
Visionary V Ministries, Mental Health Project, Women’s Community Justice Association, Jails 
Action Coalition, Black Attorneys of Legal Aid, Bronx Connect, and Center for Community 
Alternatives.
The Indispensable Role of Judges in Curtailing Excessive Pretrial Detention and Closing Rikers Island

The Indispensable Role of Judges in Curtailing Excessive Pretrial Detention and Closing 
Rikers Island
APRIL 2025
