April 2025 
Research Report 
Building School Capacity to 
Scale Up Computer Science 
Participation: 
Insights from NYC’s CS4All Initiative 
By Kathryn Hill, Michelle Flores, Rishika Jain, 
and Edgar Rivera-Cash 

Acknowledgements 
We would like to extend our gratitude to our 
colleagues on the Research Alliance’s CS4All 
evaluation team, including Cheri Fancsali, Xia Li, 
Janice Lee, June Mark, and Marlee Tavlin. We 
deeply appreciate their dedication to conducting 
the research featured in this report, and to 
providing thoughtful feedback as this work 
developed. Special thanks to Chelsea Farley, our 
communications director, for editing the report, and 
to Faith Northern and Summer Wildbill for their 
assistance with the final layout, production, and 
outreach process.  
We thank our partners at NYC Public Schools for 
their engagement with this research, with particular 
appreciation for Heather Wilson’s ongoing support. 
We are grateful to the entire CS Education team, 
especially Tunisia Mitchel and Christy Crawford. 
Their insights and collaboration have been 
invaluable to our research and have informed our 
understanding of efforts to make CS participation 
more equitable and to build schools’ capacity to 
offer CS. 
This study would not have been possible without 
the generous support of the Fund for Public 
Schools, the CS4All Founders Committee, and the 
Google Computer Science Education Research 
program. We appreciate the time they dedicated to 
asking thoughtful questions and providing 
feedback throughout the project. Finally, we are 
deeply indebted to the school leaders, teachers, 
and students who participated in our data 
collection efforts. Their responses provided 
essential on-the-ground perspectives, significantly 
enhancing our understanding of the 
implementation of the CS4All initiative in New York 
City. 
---------------------------------------------------- 
Research Alliance publications are supported by 
the following organizations, who help fund our 
capacity to engage stakeholders in our work and 
broadly communicate the results and implications 
of our studies: the Gates Foundation, Carnegie 
Corporation of New York, the Catherine and 
Joseph Aresty Foundation, New York University, 
the Wallace Foundation, and the William T. Grant 
Foundation. 
Our publications reflect the findings, 
interpretations, and conclusions of the Research 
Alliance and not necessarily those of our funders 
or individual Steering Committee members.  
Steering Committee 
Mark Dunetz, Chair 
President, New Visions for Public Schools 
Jennifer Jones Austin 
Chief Executive Officer & Executive Director, Federation of 
Protestant Welfare Agencies 
Melissa Aviles-Ramos 
Chancellor, New York City Public Schools 
Georgina Dopico 
Provost, New York University 
Frances Lucerna 
Co-Founder and Executive Director, El Puente 
Christine Mangino 
President, Queensborough Community College 
James Merriman 
Chief Executive Officer, New York City Charter School 
Center 
Michael Mulgrew 
President, United Federation of Teachers 
Félix Matos Rodriguez 
Chancellor, The City University of New York 
Henry Rubio 
President, Council of School Supervisors and 
Administrators 
Michelle Yanche 
Executive Director, Good Shepherd Services 
Leadership Team 
Cheri Fancsali 
Executive Director 
Kathryn Hill 
Research Director 
Chelsea Farley 
Communications Director 
About the Research Alliance 
Housed at NYU Steinhardt, the Research Alliance for 
New York City Schools is an independent, 
nonpartisan research center that conducts rigorous 
studies on topics that matter to the City’s public 
schools. We strive to advance excellence and equity 
in education by providing evidence about the policies 
and practices that promote students’ development 
and academic success. 

1 
Building School Capacity to Scale Up 
Computer Science Participation  
Executive Summary 
This report focuses on the NYC Computer Science for All (CS4All) initiative’s efforts to build 
schools’ capacity to expand access to CS across the district. Launched in 2015, CS4All 
aimed to provide a meaningful CS experience to every student at least once within each 
grade band (K-2, 3-5, 6-8, 9-12). As the initiative matured, it also began to support schools 
in fostering a strong CS culture—emphasizing leadership, equity, and awareness of the 
potential of CS instruction to promote student engagement and learning.  
Key Findings 
•
Elementary schools were more likely than middle and high schools to reach
the initiative’s goal of every student taking CS. Elementary schools tended to
have higher, more sustained and equitable CS participation. High schools often
stalled in their efforts, introducing CS but not substantially increasing students’
access over time. Middle schools were most likely to lag behind in CS participation
(defined in this study as consistently reaching less than 10 percent of students). Our
findings suggest that the structural barriers to offering CS to all students are greater
in middle and high schools, where CS is typically provided as a stand-alone elective
course; in elementary schools, CS tends to be integrated into other core subjects.
Middle schools, in particular, struggle to offer sufficient CS courses because they
have less room in students’ schedules for elective classes.
•
Competing instructional priorities were a major barrier to CS implementation.
Schools that lagged the most behind in participation had larger proportions of
students living in poverty and smaller proportions of students who were proficient in
math and ELA. Competing priorities—such as the need to provide remediation for
students in core subject areas—took precedence over expanding CS participation.
Educators from these schools were less likely to report that CS was a priority for
their school and that their school staff was aligned around a vision for CS.
•
Building a strong school-wide culture around CS equity is foundational for
expanding access. Schools that had sustained high participation rates were able to
align CS with other school and district instructional priorities, raise awareness in the
whole school community about what CS education is and how it supports student
engagement and learning, and develop a clear vision and plan for expanding
access to all students. Teacher leadership was important in fostering buy-in for CS
across the school community.
•
Common planning time is crucial to support successful integration of CS into
other classes. Lack of time to teach CS, and to plan new and/or modify existing
lessons, was a major barrier for teachers in schools offering integrated CS units.
The schools with sustained high participation set aside common planning time for
instructional leaders to align CS units and lessons with the larger scope and
sequence of required curriculum and with the instructional priorities of their school.
This involved providing teachers with guidance about how to incorporate

 
2 
computational thinking skills into their instruction in core subject areas, including 
ideas for specific lessons and units. 
• 
Schools that required all students to take CS were able to sustain high rates 
of participation. Schools that met the initiative’s goals found ways to make room in 
students’ schedules so that all students could take CS. For elementary schools 
offering integrated units, a promising strategy was to have a cluster teacher1 teach 
CS (a cluster teacher is a specialist—such as a science teacher—who is not 
assigned to the same group of students all day). The cluster teacher could provide 
CS instruction directly and work with classroom teachers to integrate CS into other 
core subjects. Middle and high schools that achieved high participation often made 
CS a required course; however, doing so involved challenging trade-offs around 
which elective courses were most important to offer. 
Recommendations for Policy and Practice 
As other K-12 districts nationwide aim to expand student participation in CS, lessons from 
the NYC CS4All initiative’s capacity-building efforts can inform implementation strategies 
and professional learning (PL). Key implications for policy and practice include: 
1) Continue to emphasize CS culture building in school communities. Raising 
awareness around what CS is and how it promotes student engagement and 
learning—particularly in terms of creative and critical thinking skills (Scherer et al. 
2019) that are applicable across content areas—is important to increase buy-in 
among teachers, students, and families.  
2) Help schools strategize to overcome scheduling and staffing challenges and 
align CS with other school instructional priorities. Fostering communities of 
practice where school leaders can share promising approaches with one another 
would be particularly beneficial. Providing more PL in how to integrate CS into core 
subject areas for middle and high school teachers could be a route to overcoming 
scheduling constraints and increasing CS participation by providing multiple entry 
points for students.  
3) Nurture connections between CS instruction and state standards. Provide PL 
to help map existing CS curricula and lessons onto state learning standards in core 
content areas that schools are held accountable for, or provide teachers with 
curricula/instructional materials that are already well aligned to core content 
standards. Again, cultivating communities of practice can provide a way for teachers 
to share unit and lesson plans across different schools; it can also raise awareness 
of how CS may support student learning in other subject areas and give teachers 
concrete ideas about how to implement CS. 
4) Target PL opportunities for schools lagging the most behind in participation. 
This should include support for forging partnerships with outside groups (such as 
industry partners) who can provide additional resources (e.g., funding, curricular 
materials, and technology). These partnerships can help schools offer out-of-school 
programming that begins to expose more students to CS and lays the groundwork 
for eventually implementing CS during the school day. 
 
1 “Cluster teacher” is the term NYCPS uses for this role (see the UFT's definition). In other districts, these 
teachers may be referred to as specialist teachers. 

 
3 
Introduction 
A large-scale public-private partnership, the New York City Public Schools’ (NYCPS) 
Computer Science for All (CS4All) initiative aimed to expand access to computer science 
(CS) to all students in the district. CS4All was particularly focused on reaching students 
who are disproportionately underrepresented in CS education and careers, such as Black 
and Latinx students and girls. The initiative’s ambitious goal was to provide at least one 
meaningful CS experience—that is, an experience that develops computational thinking, 
problem-solving, creativity, and critical thinking skills, and that involves career-connected 
learning—to every student at least once within each grade band (K-2, 3-5, 6-8, 9-12). 
As detailed in our report on building individual teacher capacity to implement CS, the 
initiative was initially focused on dramatically expanding professional learning (PL) 
opportunities for teachers, preparing them to teach CS in their schools. As the initiative 
matured, the district’s Computer Science Education team began to develop a “whole school 
approach” to professional learning, which was intended to foster a strong CS culture 
emphasizing equitable CS access and culturally responsive instruction throughout entire 
school communities, while also scaling up CS offerings. This shift was based in part on the 
growing recognition that the leadership of school administrators and teachers was crucial to 
successfully implementing CS. In keeping with this insight, the district expanded PL 
opportunities for school administrators and teacher leaders, in order to help them develop 
robust CS implementation plans and learn how to raise awareness about the importance of 
CS in their wider school communities. 
This report investigates the progress that NYCPS schools made toward reaching the 
initiative’s goals and sustaining participation in CS among their students. It builds on our 
past work developing progress ratings to capture the extent to which schools were reaching 
all of their students with CS, as well as the extent to which participation was equitable for 
historically underrepresented groups. We also report on results from our school survey and 
interviews with school leaders and teachers, providing a deeper examination of facilitators 
and barriers to scaling up CS offerings and building an equitable, school-wide CS culture. 
Finally, we examine the experiences of schools with different CS participation trajectories 
over time, to understand what enabled some schools to sustain high rates of participation 
and what prevented other schools from ever offering CS.  
Schools Had Different CS Participation Trajectories 
To support CS implementation, our team developed a set of CS progress ratings to 
measure the extent to which individual schools across NYC were meeting the initiative’s 
goals. These progress ratings were used as a part of school and teacher leader PL 
sessions to help schools create implementation plans for scaling up equitable CS offerings 
and for expanding student participation. They were also used by the Computer Science 
Education team to identify schools that had little to no CS implementation, allowing for the 
provision of targeted resources, funding, and PL recruitment. 
Our progress ratings captured both how many of a school’s students took CS during their 
grade band and whether CS participation was equitable in terms of gender and 
race/ethnicity. First, we created a saturation metric that reflects the percentage of students 
in the school who had at least one unit of CS instruction, or a standalone CS course, by the 

 
4 
final year of their respective grade band (i.e., 2nd, 5th, 8th, or 12th grade). Second, to 
capture equitable participation, we used three different metrics—the participation rate, the 
composition index, and the relative participation ratio—to assess whether participation was 
equitable for girls and Black and Latinx students when compared to their peers.2 Table 1 
illustrates how the saturation and equity metrics were used to calculate an overall CS 
progress rating for each school.  
Table 1: Saturation, Equity, and Overall Progress Rating Definitions 
Rating 
Saturation (the percent of 
students in the school 
who have had at least one 
CS course by the last 
grade in the grade band) 
Equity (the extent to 
which there is equitable 
CS participation among 
female, Black, and Latinx 
students) 
Overall 
Progress 
1 - Beginning  
1-29% 
At least 1 subgroup did not 
meet the equity threshold 
for any of the 3 metrics (i.e., 
the participation rate, the 
composition index, and the 
relative participation ratio). 
Average 
score of 1 
or 1.5 
2 - Progressing  
30-59% 
All 3 subgroups met the 
threshold for 1 of the 3 
metrics. 
Average 
score of 2 
or 2.5 
3 - Approaching  
60-89% 
All 3 subgroups met the 
threshold for 2 out of the 3 
metrics. 
Average 
score of 3 
or 3.5 
4 - Achieving  
90+%  
All 3 subgroups met the 
threshold for all 3 metrics. 
Average 
score of 4 
 
For the current report, we wanted to understand how efforts to implement CS, sustain high 
rates of CS participation, and foster an equitable school-wide CS culture varied across 
schools with different CS participation trajectories. To that end, we grouped schools into 
four categories using the progress ratings—which included both CS saturation and 
equitable participation—from 2019 to 2023.3 Our sample for this analysis includes 1,494 
schools.4 The four groups are as follows: 
 
 
2 These equity metrics have been used by others in examining disproportionality (see Fergus, 2016). For more 
details on these metrics, please see Fancsali et al. 2022. 
3 NYCPS began tracking CS course-taking in the 2015-16 school, so the first year we are able to report CS 
access by three- or four-year grade band is 2018-19. 
4 The sample includes all schools that had a progress rating for each year between 2019 and 2023. Progress 
ratings are calculated for schools in Districts 1-32 with a student population greater than 10, and excludes home 
schools. 

 
5 
• 
Group 1: Schools with sustained high and equitable CS participation. These 
schools had an achieving or an approaching rating for at least two consecutive 
years between 2019 and 2023. A total of 372 schools, representing about 25 
percent of the sample, met this criteria. 
• 
Group 2: Schools that ramped up CS participation, but did not sustain it. 
These schools reached achieving or approaching ratings in at least one year 
between 2019 and 2023, but did not sustain these ratings for consecutive years. A 
total of 226 schools, representing 15 percent of the sample, met this criteria. 
• 
Group 3: Schools that stalled in their CS participation. These schools never 
reached an achieving or approaching rating, but had over 10 percent saturation in at 
least one year between 2019 and 2023. A total of 462 schools, representing 31 
percent of the sample, met this criteria. 
• 
Group 4: Schools that lagged in CS participation. These schools never had 
above 10 percent saturation between 2019 and 2023. A total of 434 schools, 
representing 29 percent of the sample, met this criteria.  
To examine how schools with different CS participation trajectories varied, we used four 
sources of data: 
• 
Administrative records data for NYCPS students and school staff. This 
includes school-level data on student demographic characteristics (e.g., 
race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status, prior academic performance).  
• 
Teacher CS4All PL participation records. The initiative offered a diverse selection 
of PL programs for teachers in foundational and advanced CS curricula, equity, and 
culturally responsive pedagogy. Notably, the initiative also offered leadership PL for 
administrators and CS lead teachers. These PL programs supported administrators 
and lead teachers in building a school-wide culture and vision for CS and in creating 
and enacting a school CS implementation plan. 
• 
School and teacher leader survey administered in 2021. Administered to all 
schools, this survey was designed to gather information about school-wide 
implementation of CS. We asked respondents5 about the strength of the CS culture 
in their school, the extent to which the school community was aligned around a 
vision for offering CS, and plans for implementing that vision.6  
• 
Interviews with school administrators and CS teachers. We spoke with 53 
school staff members—23 teachers and 30 administrators—across 32 schools from 
the fall of 2020 through the spring of 2023.7  We purposefully recruited schools 
based on the four CS participation trajectories in order to learn from schools that 
were representative of each group. 
 
5 We asked each school to have either an administrator or another staff member knowledgeable about the 
school’s CS programming (e.g., a CS lead teacher) fill out the survey. Out of the 676 schools in our sample, 363 
responded, yielding a response rate of 54 percent. 
6 Since the survey was administered in 2021, we only used progress ratings from 2019 to 2021 to calculate the 
participation trajectory groups for the survey analysis. 
7 Please note that while the interview sample may overlap with the survey sample (i.e., some of the interviewees 
may have responded to the survey), they are distinct. For each recruited school, we attempted to interview at 
least one administrator and teacher, except for the schools lagging in participation, where we only interviewed 
an administrator in each. 

 
6 
In the following sections, we report on how school characteristics, uptake of professional 
development opportunities, and the strength of schools’ CS culture, vision, and 
implementation planning varied for schools with different CS participation trajectories.  
School Level, Demographic, and Geographic Differences  
We found notable differences when we examined CS participation trajectories by grade 
level (see Figure 1). A larger share of elementary schools maintained strong and equitable 
participation, compared to middle and high schools. Strikingly, while 34 percent of 
elementary schools had sustained high participation rates, only about 24 percent of middle 
schools and just 7 percent of high schools did. This indicates that elementary schools faced 
fewer barriers in meeting the initiative’s goals. 
Second, we found that a much larger share of high schools (60%) had stalled participation 
ratings, compared to elementary schools (19%) and middle schools (26%). This means that 
while most high schools were able to offer some CS to their students, far fewer of them 
managed to scale up participation and ensure that all or most students took a CS course 
between 9th and 12th grade. Finally, a larger share of middle schools (almost 37%) were 
lagging in CS participation, compared to elementary schools (about 30%) and high schools 
(about 22%). This suggests that there may be barriers specific to middle schools that are 
preventing many of them from offering any CS to their students. 
Figure 1: School Type by CS Participation Trajectory 
 
 
Source: Research Alliance calculations based on data obtained from NYC Public Schools. 
Notes: The sample includes all schools that had a progress rating for each year between 2019-2023. Progress 
ratings are calculated for schools in Districts 1-32 with a student population greater than 10, and excludes home 
schools. 
 
 

 
7 
In terms of school demographic characteristics, there are smaller differences across the 
participation trajectories (see Table 2). Overall, schools with sustained high participation 
rates tended to serve lower proportions of students living in poverty and of Black and Latinx 
students, on average, and higher proportions of students who were proficient in English 
language arts (ELA) and math, based on state exams. 
Table 2: School Demographics by CS Participation Trajectory 
 
 
 
Sustained High 
Participation 
(N=372) 
Ramped Up 
Participation 
 (N=226) 
Stalled 
Participation 
(N=462) 
Lagging 
Participation 
(N=434) 
% Students 
Living in 
Poverty 
74.5 
77.9 
77.6 
79.4 
% Black and 
Latinx 
Students 
55.7 
64.2 
67.1 
67.9 
% Proficient 
in ELA 
50.0 
46.6 
45.8 
43.8 
% Proficient 
in Math 
49.6 
41.0 
33.3 
39.2 
Source: Research Alliance calculations based on data obtained from NYC Public Schools.  
Note: For high schools, the percentage of students who are proficient in math and ELA is based on average 8th 
grade test scores for the 9th grade students in 2023. 
 
We see important differences when we look at participation trajectories across NYC’s 32 
community school districts (CSDs). CSD 26, in northeastern Queens, has the greatest 
proportion of schools that sustained high and equitable participation rates, with over 80 
percent of the schools meeting that benchmark (see Figure 2 on the next page). Notably, 
CSD 26 took part in a district engagement pilot that involved its superintendent and 
borough support center. With the Computer Science Education team, these district leaders 
coordinated around a year-long strategy to align CS programming with other district 
priorities and to position district schools to run their own professional learning and expand 
CS instruction. The CSDs with the next four largest proportions of schools with sustained 
high participation rates are CSD 31 in Staten Island, CSD 30 and CSD 25 in Queens, and 
CSD 22 in Brooklyn—all with between 40 and 50 percent of their schools sustaining high 
participation rates between 2019 and 2023 (see the Appendix for the proportion of schools 
in the sustained high participation trajectory for each CSD). 
 
 
 

 
8 
Figure 2: Percent of Schools with Sustained High Participation by CSD  
 
Source: Research Alliance calculations based on data obtained from NYC Public Schools.  
There are also differences across CSDs in the percentage of schools that lagged behind in 
CS participation. CSD 9 in the Bronx had the greatest share of schools that lagged behind, 
with 57 percent of the schools unable to provide CS to at least 10 percent of their students 
between 2019 and 2023. The CSDs with the next four largest proportions of schools 
lagging in CS participation were CSDs 10, 11, and 12 in the Bronx and CSDs 6 and 7 in 
upper Manhattan—all with between 40 and 50 percent of their schools falling into the 
lagging category (see the Appendix for the proportion of schools in the lagging behind in 
participation trajectory for each CSD). 
Figure 3: Percent of Schools Lagging Behind in Participation by CSD  
 
Source: Research Alliance calculations based on data obtained from NYC Public Schools.  

 
9 
Differences in Uptake of Professional Learning Opportunities  
We found large differences across participation trajectories in terms of educators’ 
engagement in CS4All PL offerings (see Table 3). In particular, a much lower proportion of 
schools lagging in participation took part in school leader PL (only 11%) and teacher leader 
PL (2%), compared to schools in the other categories. While over half of the schools in the 
other categories sent two or more teachers to any CS4All PL (e.g., PL in CS curricula, 
equity and culturally responsive pedagogy, and/or school leadership), only 18 percent of 
lagging schools did so. These results might indicate both that PL helped schools offer more 
CS and that school staff who were already more bought into offering CS might have been 
more likely to participate in PL. 
Table 3: School Professional Learning Uptake by CS Participation Trajectory 
 
Sustained High 
Participation 
(N=372) 
Ramped Up 
Participation 
 (N=226) 
Stalled 
Participation 
(N=462) 
Lagging 
Participation 
(N=434) 
% Ever 
participated in 
school leader PL 
48.1 
49.1 
38.7 
11.1 
% Ever 
participated in 
teacher leader PL 
29.6 
21.7 
16.7 
2.0 
% Sent two or 
more teachers to 
any type of PL  
64.0 
64.1 
52.0 
17.8 
Source: Research Alliance calculations based on data obtained from NYC Public Schools and the Research 
Alliance 2021 CS School Survey.  
 
Strength of School CS Culture, Vision, and Implementation 
Planning  
Next, we report on survey items related to the strength of CS school culture (see Table 4 
on the next page).8 Notably, there was not much variation in school and teacher leaders’ 
responses to the statement, “The majority of teachers and counselors at my school think it 
is important to offer CS.” Across progress categories, between 66 and 72 percent of 
respondents agreed or strongly agreed that this is true. There were bigger differences in 
whether school and teacher leaders from the different groups believed that CS was a high 
priority for their school. Strikingly, 80 percent of leaders in schools with sustained equitable 
and high participation agreed that CS was a priority for their school, while only 59 percent 
of leaders in lagging schools agreed with this statement.  
 
 
 
8 In this brief, we only report on some of the CS culture, vision, and implementation items from the survey. The 
full set of survey results, which demonstrate similar patterns in responses across the CS participation 
trajectories, are available upon request. 

 
10 
Table 4: CS Culture by Participation Trajectory 
Sustained High 
Participation 
(N= 97) 
Ramped Up 
Participation 
 (N= 59) 
Stalled 
Participation 
(N=139) 
Lagging 
Participation 
(N=51) 
“CS education is 
currently a priority for 
my school.” (%) 
80.4 
71.2 
73.4 
58.8 
“The majority of 
teachers and 
counselors at my 
school think it is 
important to offer 
CS.” (%) 
71.3 
72.4 
65.9 
69.4 
Source: Research Alliance calculations based on data obtained from NYC Public Schools and the Research 
Alliance 2021 CS School Survey. 
Note: Table shows the percentage of respondents agreeing or strongly agreeing with each survey item.  
 
When we look at survey items about the strength of the school’s CS vision (see Table 5), 
we see that about 80 percent of leaders in schools with sustained high participation agreed 
that their vision for CS aligns with other school initiatives and takes into account competing 
priorities, compared to about 57 percent in schools lagging behind in participation. Notably, 
across the board, less than half of school leaders reported that teachers in their school 
understood their school’s definition of CS. This suggests that school leaders might need to 
spend more time raising awareness about the importance of CS with their entire school 
community, so that even teachers who are not teaching CS know what it is and how it can 
support student learning. 
Table 5: CS Vision by Participation Trajectory 
 
Sustained High 
Participation 
(N=93) 
Ramped Up 
Participation 
 (N=56) 
Stalled 
Participation 
(N=127) 
Lagging 
Participation 
(N=45) 
“I am aware of how my 
school’s CS vision aligns 
with other school-wide 
initiatives and takes into 
account other competing 
priorities.” (%) 
80.4 
67.9 
74.8 
56.8 
“Teachers in my school can 
understand the school’s 
definition of CS and explain 
it to others.” (%) 
39.8 
33.9 
42.6 
20.0 
Source: Research Alliance calculations based on data obtained from NYC Public Schools and the Research 
Alliance 2021 CS School Survey. 
Note: Table shows the percentage of respondents agreeing or strongly agreeing with each survey item.  

 
11 
Finally, we turn to survey items capturing the extent to which schools have a fully 
developed CS implementation plan (see Table 6). In general, schools with lagging 
participation rates were less likely to have various aspects of an implementation plan in 
place, according to school and teacher leaders. In particular, a much smaller share of 
schools lagging in participation reported that they had a plan to organize a school-wide 
event or engage families in CS education.  
Table 6: CS Implementation Plans by Participation Trajectory 
Sustained High 
Participation 
(N=101) 
Ramped Up 
Participation 
 (N=60) 
Stalled 
Participation 
(N=144) 
Lagging 
Participation 
(N=52) 
“My school has an 
implementation 
plan.” (%) 
74.3 
70.0 
72.9 
32.7 
“My school’s 
implementation plan 
has a plan for 
organizing a CS 
event.” (%) 
52.5 
41.7 
38.2 
13.5 
“My school’s 
implementation plan 
has a plan for 
increasing access for 
underrepresented 
students.” (%) 
29.7 
31.7 
36.8 
17.3 
“My school’s 
implementation plan 
has a plan for 
engaging families in 
CS education.” (%) 
51.5 
28.3 
29.9 
11.5 
Source: Research Alliance calculations based on data obtained from NYC Public Schools and the Research 
Alliance 2021 CS School Survey. 
Note: Table shows the percentage of respondents agreeing or strongly agreeing with each survey item.  
Insights from Educator Interviews 
We took a deeper dive into the perspectives of school leaders and teachers by conducting 
semi-structured interviews with 53 school staff members—23 teachers and 30 
administrators–—across 32 schools. The interviews took place between the fall of 2020 
and the spring of 2023 (see Table 7 for a breakdown of our interview sample). We 
purposefully recruited schools based on the four CS participation trajectories in order to 
hear from schools that were representative of each group. For the schools that maintained 
equitable and high participation rates, we focused on what school staff saw as critical 
factors in making their CS program sustainable. For schools that ramped up participation, 
we focused on what helped them grow their CS program. For schools with stalled  
 
 

 
12 
participation, we focused on the barriers they faced in expanding CS participation to more 
students. Finally, for schools that lagged in CS participation, we focused on understanding 
the challenges that had prevented them from offering CS. 
Table 7: Interview Sample by School Participation Trajectory 
Sustained High 
Participation  
Ramped Up 
Participation 
Stalled 
Participation 
Lagging in 
Participation 
Total 
# of Schools  
 7 schools  
(4 elementary, 1 
middle, 2 high)  
3 schools 
(2 elementary, 1 
middle)   
  11 schools  
(2 elementary, 2 
middle, 7 high)  
11 schools 
(4 elementary, 3 
middle, 4 high) 
32  
# of Teachers  
10 
3 
10 
0 
23 
# of Administrators 
5 
3 
11 
11 
30 
 
In addition to the leadership PL, CS4All offered PL that was designed to help teachers 
implement CS using one of the following models: 
• 
Integrated CS units. These sessions focused on integrating CS into lessons and 
units offered during regular class time (i.e., not in afterschool programming) across 
content areas for K-2, 3-5, and 6-8 teachers. The goal was to prepare teachers to 
teach one unit of instruction, lasting at least 11 hours, that integrated computer 
science into another subject (e.g., math, ELA). Given that the unit trainings were 
focused on the lower grade bands, elementary schools tended to offer integrated 
CS; middle school teachers were trained in both how to offer integrated units and, 
as described in the next bullet, how to teach stand-alone CS courses. 
• 
Stand-alone courses. CS4All offered PL sessions that trained teachers in offering 
stand-alone CS courses for grades 6-12. These courses' curricula were grounded in 
research and were designed to provide students with opportunities to develop 
computational concepts and practices based on their personal passions. Schools 
offering stand-alone courses could provide multiple pathways depending on what 
works best for their school, including half- and full-year courses ranging from 
introductory to advanced AP offerings.  
• 
Sequences. CS4All offered PL designed to prepare teachers to implement a 
sequence of CS experiences (e.g., courses or integrated units) comprising the 
Software Engineering Program (SEP) for grades 6-12 and the Software Engineering 
Program Junior (SEPJr.) for grades K-5. A minimum of two teachers from a school 
participated as a team, and schools committed to participating for multiple years to 
implement a CS sequence/pathway in their school. The programs offered instruction 
and experience in computer programming, robotics, web design, physical 
computing, and game design. Students also participated in hackathons and 
showcases, and in work-based experiences with industry partners. 
 

 
13 
For our interviews, we selected schools that represented the integrated unit and stand-
alone models of CS implementation9 to understand how barriers and facilitators to 
implementation might differ across contexts. In the following sections, we discuss factors 
that impeded or facilitated schools’ capacity to meet the initiative’s CS participation goals. 
Given that the barriers and facilitators tended to be different depending on whether schools 
were offering CS through integrated units or stand-alone courses, we discuss each 
separately. 
What Were the Barriers to Offering Integrated CS Units to All Students? 
Lack of Time to Implement CS Instruction 
A major barrier for schools attempting to offer integrated CS units was insufficient time to 
implement CS instruction. All of the administrators and teachers that we interviewed—even 
in schools with sustained high participation rates—reported that classroom teachers 
struggled to find time to teach CS units. Carving out time for CS was especially difficult 
because there were other priorities that took precedence. A CS lead teacher, who was just 
beginning to create CS lessons to be incorporated into the instructional learning modules 
that her elementary school’s teachers would follow throughout the year, underscored this. 
She explained,  
“In our schools, every grade has different instructional modules. You have 30 days 
for this module, and then you have 30 days for next. Are we going to have enough 
time to integrate CS in those 30 days?”  
In particular, school staff reported struggling to fit integrated CS units into the scope and 
sequencing of other mandated curricula for which they were held accountable in state 
exams. They also reported having insufficient time and capacity to design or modify 
lessons and curricula to ensure that they reflected the school’s instructional priorities and 
met the needs of their specific school population. As one elementary school administrator 
noted, 
“Adjusting a great lesson for the student sitting in front of you is a full-time job. If 
we want computer science to be in the classrooms, we have to find, create, or 
provide that [adjustment] at some level. This is very, very time-consuming, and I'm 
not sure it's the highest leverage use of our time for student learning right now.”  
Due to these barriers, teacher buy-in to implement CS has suffered. Attempting to integrate 
CS into other instructional units felt like another burden on top of other urgent priorities. 
One teacher explained,  
“Time is everything. What we're seeing is, everybody's pressed and pulled in many 
different directions. When you say, ‘Can you do this?,’ the first thing is, a wall goes 
up, and it's, ‘No, I can't do any more.’”  
 
9 Two of the elementary schools we studied had previously sent teachers to PL sessions to implement a 
sequence of CS curricula (i.e., SEPJr.), but were implementing CS through integrated units by the time of our 
interviews. 

 
14 
Administrators and teachers also reported a lack of recognition among some educators 
about the potential of CS to boost student engagement in learning and mastery of content 
in other subject areas. As one administrator observed,  
“One of the things that teachers need to see is that this is not another program 
that’s been pushed on them. As they’re working through projects in science, social 
studies, or ELA, integrating CS learning and techniques gives students another form 
of learning in their classroom that taps into different modalities. Academically, this 
excitement will help bring students up to another level and give them that motivation 
to do better.”  
The message that lack of time to implement was a major barrier for schools offering 
integrated CS units is consistent with findings from other research on the NYC CS4All 
initiative (Israel et al., 2022;  Fancsali et al., 2020). Taken together, these findings strongly 
indicate that teachers view insufficient time as a primary challenge to implementing CS, 
particularly at the elementary level. 
Lack of CS Buy-In from the Wider School Community 
In the lagging schools that we studied, barriers to generating buy-in for CS were 
compounded. Interviewees from these schools reported that a lack of buy-in among 
teachers was often driven by a misunderstanding of CS instruction, and by the assumption 
that CS is just about using technology rather than focusing on teaching computational 
thinking skills, which can be done with both plugged and unplugged lessons.10 Notably, this 
misunderstanding was also reflected in our school survey: while 40 percent of leaders in 
schools with sustained equitable and high participation rates reported that teachers 
understood their school’s definition of CS, only 20 percent of leaders in schools with 
lagging participation did.  
Some school staff reported that hesitation among teachers about using computers, 
devices, and other technology was a barrier. As an example, a leader of a progressive 
elementary school described how they had to overcome teachers’ preconceived notions 
and expand their thinking about what computer science education has to offer. He said, 
“There's a belief amongst a number of the staff members that too much tech isn't 
good for kids, too much screen time isn't good for them. Tech then becomes a no-no 
to some of the adults. Since I've been principal, I’ve been modeling [CS] integration. 
We can be progressive and tech-literate, but it's a slow buy-in for a number of staff 
members.”  
This hesitation and general lack of buy-in among teachers meant that school staff were less 
likely to take up opportunities to attend CS4ALL PL offered by the district. As noted above, 
only 18 percent of schools lagging in participation sent two or more teachers to any type of 
PL, compared to over 50 percent of schools in the other participation trajectories.  
 
 
10 “Unplugged” CS lessons and activities teach underlying CS concepts and computational thinking skills without 
the use of a computer or other device (e.g., tablets). 

 
15 
In addition, school staff reported a lack of demand from the wider school community—
including families—to offer more CS. As one school leader from an elementary school with 
a high proportion of students living in poverty shared, 
“There's been no demand. My parents have never asked me, Why are their kids not 
getting technology? My families talk about social services and different things.”  
Notably, in our survey, only about 12 percent of schools lagging in participation had a plan 
to engage families in CS, while about half of schools with sustained high participation rates 
did. 
Specific Barriers for Lower-Resourced and Lower-Performing Schools 
Our survey findings highlighted that schools lagging behind in CS implementation had a 
larger share of students who were not proficient in ELA or math. In our interviews with staff 
from these schools, most reported that integrating CS took a backseat to more pressing 
priorities, such as remediation in core subject areas. As one elementary school principal 
told us, 
“I have a Title I population. My babies are already coming in behind the eight ball 
and [need] a lot of remediation. I'm training staff on how to teach students to read. I 
can't think about how to integrate more computer science into what we're doing. I 
need [teachers] to be proficient at teaching children how to read and write.”  
Schools lagging in participation also asserted that other district priorities led them to 
deemphasize CS. As an example, a dual-language elementary school we studied started 
offering integrated CS units in some classrooms with the help of an outside university-
based program. The school was not able to sustain these offerings after the partnership 
concluded. When asked about the school’s plans to start implementing CS again, the 
school leader responded,  
“My staff is extremely limited, and so placing that on the teachers right now, I know 
that would not get any kind of attention. The chancellor has mandated schools to 
switch curricular programs for reading and for math. We're in the midst of adopting 
those changes, so I'm not bringing on any [other] big initiatives.”  
Additionally, the school staff we interviewed from schools lagging in CS participation also 
reported that resource and funding constraints prevented them from offering more CS. As 
one elementary school leader explained,  
“We're not a STEM or tech school, so we really just have school-based funding. 
Having a maker space and access to 3D printers and all of those things can really 
create student interest in coding and wanting to do [CS]. I have not had the 
opportunity to do it at my present school yet. It would be great to have [NYCPS] 
support in terms of: How do we access funds to make some of this happen?”  
Most of the leaders from schools lagging in participation echoed this sentiment, 
emphasizing that support in accessing additional funding streams for purchasing materials 
to offer CS would be beneficial.  

 
16 
What Were the Facilitators to Offering Integrated CS Units? 
Anchoring CS Integration in a Cluster Classroom 
Among the study schools offering integrated CS units, all six that had sustained equitable 
and high participation or were able to ramp up participation had a cluster teacher who 
delivered CS instruction; a cluster teacher is a teacher who teaches multiple classes of 
students across grade levels. Every elementary school in NYC has a cluster teacher, to 
ensure that students receive instruction during classroom teachers’ prep periods. In the 
schools we visited, these staff played a variety of roles, including technology and computer 
science teachers, STEM teachers, and a librarian and literacy specialists. The cluster 
teacher served as an anchor for growing and sustaining the CS program, as they were 
scheduled to provide all students with consistent CS instruction.  
Cluster teachers offering CS instruction allowed schools to more quickly ramp up their 
participation. There were several schools that saw a dramatic change in their progress 
ratings from one year to the next once their cluster teacher was able to attend CS4All PL 
and begin implementing CS instruction. As an example, one of the elementary schools we 
studied increased the percentage of students receiving CS in their grade band from 11 
percent in 2020 to 100 percent in 2021, as it shifted to intentionally blocking off one period 
a week for each class to receive CS with the school’s STEM cluster teacher, instead of 
having the teacher offer it sporadically. The school’s administrator said,  
“Trying to balance teaching science and CS is hard. Now that it is on the schedule, 
the [STEM teacher] knows, and the students know, that on this day every week, they 
will do CS.”   
Notably, the schools we interviewed with sustained high participation rates also had several 
classroom teachers who were implementing CS into other content areas, in addition to the 
work of the cluster teacher. The staff we interviewed told us that it was important for 
sustainability that more than one teacher was teaching CS to guard against turnover. As a 
principal from one of these schools explained, 
“Eventually, I would like to see my stand-alone CS cluster dropped and really have 
100 percent full integration in every single content area in every single unit. What 
are the ways that we can incorporate CS and hit all the standards? That’s where I’d 
like to go.” 
In these schools, the CS cluster teacher supported integration into other classrooms by 
teaching foundational computer science concepts that could then be reinforced with aligned 
lessons taught by other classroom teachers. 
Teacher Leadership to Increase Buy-In 
Administrators and teachers reported that teacher leadership in CS was integral to ramping 
up implementation. For instance, one elementary school leader who had begun to require 
that all teachers integrate CS at least one period per week shared that teacher interest 
drove the school’s integration efforts. She recounted, 

 
17 
“One of my teachers, who is very interested in computer science, saw some PDs 
that were being offered, and she said, ‘Well, is it okay for me to attend?’ She 
attended. Then when she went, she decided to start teaching robotics to her 
students. And she was incorporating it in her classroom, and other teachers, as 
they're passing by her class, they're like, ‘Oh, that looks good. What are you doing 
there? What is this? What is that?’” 
As exemplified above, teachers who champion integrating CS into their classroom and 
model what it looks like to others can foster other teachers’ interest in trying to integrate 
CS. Many of the schools with sustained high rates of participation emphasized that it takes 
a team of both teachers and administrators to lead the work and to ensure that it is viable 
for the long term. As one principal from a school with sustained high rates of participation 
said,  
“I always say this: It really only takes one person to make change. If you can find 
one person who’s going to really spearhead your CS vision, then you’re on the right 
track because that one person will get one other person. That one other person will 
get one other person. It can’t be the administrator just saying, ‘Do it.’” 
School staff also believed that providing professional development sessions or training 
workshops for teachers—that center on demystifying CS and providing examples of how 
CS can be integrated across content areas—could help improve buy-in. For example, in a 
middle school that offered CS primarily through integrated units, the CS technology 
teacher, who was scheduled to see all sixth graders, also provided training for other 
teachers on integrating CS into their respective content areas. Coordinating with school 
leaders, the technology teacher facilitated professional development sessions that helped 
teachers gain a deeper understanding of CS and underlying computational thinking skills, 
such as pattern recognition, iterating on processes, and debugging errors. She described 
the PL, saying, 
“[The teachers] brought a lesson with them, and then we incorporated computer 
science into their lesson so they understood how it worked. It opened up their mind 
to thinking about CS, so they know it’s not just about taking out computers and 
using them. It’s about using algorithms, having the students understand processes, 
and understand how they can go back and correct any mistakes that were made, or 
[think through] how they can do things differently.” 
Across all of the schools offering integrated units that we studied, staff said that concrete 
examples of lessons that integrate CS would be especially helpful in encouraging more 
teachers to implement CS content. 
Setting Aside Common Planning Time 
Given the lack of time that classroom teachers had to plan new and/or modify existing CS 
lessons, setting aside common team planning time was crucial to implementation. 
Interviewees reported that allocating more time for in-house CS planning served as a 
valuable support for teachers who were integrating CS. Planning could also involve 
developing CS course sequences or curriculum, and facilitating in-school professional 
development. 

 
18 
In the schools we studied, these efforts were generally led by the CS cluster teacher, who 
saw students across different classrooms and grades. The cluster teacher would act as an 
instructional leader and work with other classroom teachers to create lessons that 
integrated CS in different content areas and reinforced the CS skills students were learning 
in the cluster classroom. This could include strategies for incorporating computational 
thinking into other classroom routines outside of specific lessons or units, such as getting 
kindergarten students to understand that the daily schedule was akin to a computer 
algorithm. One of the elementary schools that had sustained high CS participation carved 
out regular common planning time, in which the CS cluster teacher met with a team of 
classroom teachers who were designated as each grade level’s CS lead. The school’s 
principal noted,  
“Our computer science teacher took the CS standards and really thought about 
where they fit into our other grade-level standards. She created rubrics and student 
checklists, and all of those things are shared back with our classroom teachers, so 
that they’re not only being used in our computer science classroom, but they’re 
being used in all of our classrooms.”  
For this school, widespread integration across classrooms allowed them to sustain their 
high CS participation rate, even after their cluster teacher became a school administrator 
and CS was no longer offered in a cluster classroom. 
Partnerships with Outside Groups to Address Resource Limitations 
For schools that were beginning to ramp up their CS offerings, afterschool programs 
provided access to technology and materials to support CS instruction and to start making 
inroads to integrating CS during the school day. Almost all of the study schools offering 
integrated units reported providing an afterschool program before providing school-day CS 
instruction. For the schools lagging behind in participation, which often faced additional 
resource and capacity limitations, this was a way for students to have at least some CS 
exposure. As one school leader outlined,  
“We are going to have an afterschool [program]. We are trying to see if we can 
incorporate some coding, especially for children in grades 2 to 5. That would be 
another way for us to incorporate the computer science that they might miss [during 
the school day], because the majority of my students, they stay in after school.”  
In fact, all lagging schools in this sample offered some form of CS out-of-school-time 
programming, such as robotics clubs, coding afterschool, and weekend robotics programs. 
Schools from the other progress trajectories also reported having received additional 
support through outside partnerships. One Bronx school attributed their successful CS 
program to a grant from Code.org. As a teacher there expressed,  
“The principal was able to get a grant for technology, so we were lucky in the sense 
that she was able to purchase a lot of materials. We also have iPads for every child 
when they come to the room. When we were in workshops, that’s some of the 
challenges that some teachers have, that they don’t have the technology. I don’t 
think we would’ve been successful if we didn’t have the materials that we had.”  

 
19 
Building partnerships with outside organizations offers schools additional funding, 
materials, and staffing to sustain their CS programs and was especially beneficial to 
schools with less infrastructure in beginning to expose students to CS. 
What Were the Barriers to Offering Stand-Alone CS Courses? 
Staffing Capacity Barriers 
Staffing capacity was a significant challenge for schools working to offer stand-alone 
courses. Many of the middle and high schools we studied relied on teachers who primarily 
taught classes in other core subject areas to also teach CS. This was due to budget 
constraints that prevented the schools from hiring dedicated CS instructors. One principal 
said that a critical barrier to offering more CS is “teacher power.” She elaborated by saying 
that,  
“Because [CS] is part of the math department at this point, I’m splitting between 
math and computer science. If I had the freedom to hire three computer science 
teachers, that would be revolutionary for us.”  
Another high school leader echoed this sentiment, saying that, 
“Having a small school, it's very difficult. A lot of teachers are spread very thin, and 
there's only so many courses that they can teach. It’s a struggle that we don't have 
the ability to hire more teachers to be able to offer computer science-aligned 
courses across all grade levels.”  
Finding teachers prepared to teach CS was also challenging, because even with the 
expanded PL opportunities afforded by the CS4All initiative, our respondents still believed 
that teaching CS in high school required specialized content knowledge that not all 
teachers possessed—particularly when it came to advanced programming languages. One 
of the high school principals, who was working to create a data science career and 
technical education (CTE) track in his school that would include programming classes, 
noted,  
“It’s hard finding teachers that know computer programming. If you do have those 
skills, you’re probably not working in education. You’re probably working in the 
private sector making a lot more money.”  
Moreover, many teachers participating in CS4All professional development sessions are 
relatively new to CS subject matter and pedagogy, which could potentially lead to less 
rigorous academic expectations for their students. One principal in a school where teachers 
in the school’s math department teach CS said,  
“Because my teachers are still fairly new to this, I think that the expectations are a 
little bit low. I don’t think that they’re demanding as much out of the kids in terms of 
learning and demonstrating understanding of their coding abilities or statistical 
analysis abilities, because everything’s still very fresh.”  
Even when schools were able to hire and/or train teachers to offer CS, the teachers were 
not always able to teach enough CS courses for all of the students to have access. Often, 

 
20 
those teachers also had to teach courses in other core subject areas that were mandated—
such as mathematics, English language arts, science, and social studies—as well as 
mandated elective courses, such as art and physical education. These competing demands 
on teachers’ time made it hard for many schools to meet (or even approach) CS4All’s 
goals.   
Not Offering Sufficient CS Courses for All Students to Participate 
It is notable that a large share of NYC high schools (60 percent) stalled in their participation 
rates over time. This means that while they were able to offer CS to some of their students, 
they were never able to build a robust enough program to reach the entire student 
population. Our interviews suggest that in schools offering stand-alone courses, staffing 
and scheduling constraints often limited access to only a subset of students—who, as we 
have documented in other work, tend to be higher performing academically (Li et al. 2025). 
We found that for all of the schools that struggled to meet the initiative’s goals, CS was 
generally only offered as an elective, or solely for students who were a part of a particular 
academic program or track within the school. When CS was offered as an elective, 
participation depended largely on student interest; this might be influenced by a variety of 
factors, including how welcome students feel in CS classrooms. 
In the schools we studied that did not have a CS or technology-related programmatic focus, 
CS was often offered as an elective alongside other electives that were more aligned to the 
school theme. When presented with these choices, students might opt into the other 
electives over CS. In one such school, the AP CS teacher we interviewed noted that 
students have a lot of choices in what to take once they are in their junior or senior years, 
and that CS might not always be their top choice. She told us that a portion of the students 
in her class were just dumped there because they had a “hole in their schedule.” She 
concluded, 
“I don’t think the [administration] is necessarily opposed to having CS goals and a 
vision for the school to [offer more CS], but it has to lay nicely within the other 
context. That’s always the tricky part.” 
Another principal, of a high school with a career-specific theme, said that they wanted to 
have a robust CS program at the school, but that “there are so many other offerings and 
opportunities that they want to provide students” that “we have a hard time figuring out what 
complements what and what fits in where.” 
In particular, schools offering a non-CS related CTE certification might have additional 
course and competency requirements that students have to meet to earn professional 
credentials or licenses upon graduation. Sometimes these requirements can be resource- 
and time-intensive, adding further complexity to scheduling decisions and resource 
allocation. One CTE high school leader, from a school lagging in participation with just one 
CS course for a student body of over 2,000, explained, “Because we are a CTE school, the 
elective program is already designed and picked and locked.” Currently, there is no plan in 
place to ramp up CS participation at this school. 
 
 

 
21 
Dealing with Instructional Trade-Offs to Offer More CS Courses 
The school staff we interviewed pointed out that offering more CS would involve not 
offering other courses—ones that might, in their estimation, be more important to provide. 
Several leaders highlighted the opportunity cost of introducing more CS and the inherent 
trade-offs involved. For middle schools, this seems to be a particular barrier, as they have 
less room in students’ schedules for electives than high schools typically do. A middle 
school leader we spoke with shared, 
 “We are bound by state law as far as the amount of minutes that students have to 
take [courses in core subjects] and the [other] content areas, [such as] physical 
education. There are not that many periods in a day, so there has to be a trade-off in 
order for us to offer it to every student.”  
Another leader, in a high school that had recently exited Targeted Support and 
Improvement (TSI) status11, said that “our instructional focus is very much geared towards 
academic core courses and students earning credit and then mastering Regents exams.” 
He added that,  
“Sometimes it’s hard to program our students for computer science in their 
freshman year, because there is another elective where they’re really needing to 
build their core credits for graduation during those first two years.”  
Remediation efforts are also necessary when students are not on track to meet mandated 
benchmarks. In one of the middle schools we studied, the principal explained that entering 
elementary school students required varying levels of catch-up, further complicating 
scheduling considerations. He said, 
 “As we looked at our performance last year as a school, and the year prior to that, 
in terms of… the New York state assessments, we found that there was a need for 
more academic intervention periods to really address gaps for many of our scholars 
coming in at the 6th grade level. That's why we decided it made the most sense for 
us to eliminate [CS] in 6th grade, because the idea is, if we close those gaps in 6th 
grade, we won't see them continue to grow in 7th and 8th grade.”  
Another factor that surfaced in multiple interviews was that English Language Learners 
require dedicated language support in their schedules, which makes it more difficult to add 
another elective. Moreover, schools must address other critical priorities like improving 
attendance and preventing dropouts. A middle school leader shared, “At the district level, 
[CS] is not a priority. Right now it's increasing scores, attendance, reducing chronic 
absenteeism, and increasing daily attendance.” The need to focus on these concerns 
impeded schools’ capacity to effectively scale up CS. 
 
 
 
11 Under ESSA (the Every Student Succeeds Act), schools with TSI status are those that are “consistently 
underperforming” for any group of students, as defined by the state. 

 
22 
What Were the Facilitators to Offering Stand-Alone CS Courses to All 
Students? 
Making CS a Required Courses 
The middle and high schools that met the initiative’s goals managed to create a master 
course sequence where all students took at least one CS course as a requirement. To 
ensure access during the high school grade band, the schools we studied scheduled all 
students to take CS at least once during a set grade. For example, one high school, which 
serves newly arrived immigrant students, scheduled all 12th graders to take CS with a 
teacher who previously taught math but was now dedicated to CS full-time. The principal of 
that school noted that:  
“If you want all students to take CS and not self-select, then you have to build a 
structure to support it.”  
In an arts-themed school we studied, the assistant principal built in CS as a part of the 
required 9th grade rotation through elective offerings, and also offered AP CS as a course 
that could fulfill a math or science core requirement for 11th and 12th grade students after 
they met their Regents requirements. However, doing so involved sacrificing other courses 
they could potentially offer. She said, 
“I know a lot of small schools have to make difficult choices. I cut AP Calculus in 
order to make CS a math class for seniors, because we can only offer so much.”  
Aligning CS with Other School-Wide Instructional Priorities 
The schools with the highest participation rates were able to make CS a core part of their 
schools’ curricular offerings, and align it with other instructional priorities. It is notable that 
all of these schools either had a theme or programmatic focus that was CS or technology-
related (e.g., one of the high schools in this group has a software engineering theme) or 
they had a teacher or administrator who was a champion for CS, and who worked to build 
out a CS curriculum that fit into the school theme and/or programs that the school was 
already offering. For some schools, this came about more naturally, particularly when the 
school already had a CS or technology focus. For other schools, visioning work was 
required to weave CS into the school theme—work that was typically led by an individual 
administrator or teacher who was an advocate for CS. 
For example, the assistant principal in one of the high schools with a performing arts theme 
felt strongly that even though they were an arts school, they needed to equip students with 
21st century skills. She said,  
“Not that many students will get a job as a singer. Whereas sound production, video 
editing—all of those can involve coding. All of these technology skills are relevant, 
even in the arts.”  
She described facing some pushback at first, including saying that their school principal 
worried that they were becoming “too tech-y.” However, she was able to convince her 
school community that offering CS was valuable, and that they should help students 

 
23 
understand how CS skills could potentially be useful for arts-related careers. Many of the 
school staff we interviewed felt that the CS4All PL opportunities where they had the space 
to do this visioning work had been valuable; however, they noted that it was most effective 
when CS teachers and administrators could undertake this work together.  
Building Staffing Capacity to Offer More CS 
One strategy that administrators found promising to increase staffing capacity was to 
always be attentive to which teachers might have the potential to teach CS—both when 
hiring new staff and when assessing the skill set of current staff. The assistant principal of 
one of the middle schools with high participation rates—whose CS lead teacher built out a 
vertically aligned sequence of CS courses for students—discussed taking the capacity to 
teach CS into consideration when hiring staff. He said,  
“I’m keeping my ears out for candidates that are qualified [in CS]. If they are 
qualified, we’ll have them in for a demo lesson and interview so we can at least have 
that on file.”  
When assessing the skill sets of current staff, a few of the schools provided in-house 
professional development opportunities led by current CS teachers. As an example, the 
performing arts-themed high school offered one section of AP CS as a co-taught Integrated 
Co-Teaching (ICT) class. This ensured that students with disabilities could participate in 
CS, and enabled teachers who were new to computer science to co-teach with another, 
more seasoned CS teacher. One of the teachers who we interviewed said this experience 
helped them become less intimidated by CS, and led them to pursue further PL 
opportunities through the district initiative.  
Discussion and Recommendations 
Drawing on interviews and analyses of school survey and administrative data for schools 
with different participation trajectories, our study identified several facilitators that helped 
schools meet the initiative’s goals for all students to take CS in each grade band. Below, 
we highlight key implications for policy and practice. 
Enhancing Efforts to Integrate CS Units in Elementary Schools 
Anchor CS instruction in a cluster classroom, while encouraging other classroom 
teachers to provide integrated CS units. The schools that were able to sustain high rates 
of CS participation in integrated units had a cluster teacher who implemented CS across 
classrooms and grade levels. This enabled schools to offer CS more consistently and to 
more students. These schools also had other classroom teachers who were integrating CS, 
ensuring that CS instruction was more widespread and that it could be sustained if the 
cluster teacher left the classroom or school. Training cluster teachers to implement CS and 
lead integration efforts in schools is a promising strategy both to ensure all students receive 
CS and to promote wider integration across other classrooms. 
 

 
24 
Set aside common team planning time for CS implementation and foster wider 
communities of practice. Teachers struggled to find time to integrate CS instructional 
units in their classrooms in part because they felt the need to design or modify lessons 
suited to their students and aligned with the scope and sequence of the required curriculum 
and instructional priorities of their school. At the schools with high participation rates, 
educators overcame these barriers by setting aside common instructional planning time, 
which allowed classroom teachers and instructional leaders to come together to modify 
existing curricula (such as those provided by CS4All) and create “shovel-ready” lessons for 
teachers to use. The district could support this instructional planning by helping to foster 
communities of practice, perhaps building on the work of the Exploring Equity in Computer 
Science PL. Encouraging teachers from different schools to share lessons and units that 
have worked well may be particularly beneficial.  
Cultivate teacher leadership and wider buy-in across school communities, including 
families. Teacher buy-in is crucial for schools offering integrated units, because this model 
relies on individual teachers to find the time and capacity to participate in relevant PL 
opportunities and integrate CS into their classes. When teachers and others in the wider 
school community do not understand what computer science instruction is or how it can 
support student learning and engagement, buy-in suffers. Teacher leaders should model 
what CS integration looks like in their classrooms—particularly how it can support learning 
in core content areas for which schools are held accountable, such as math and ELA. In 
addition, school-wide CS events, such as hackathons or participation in CS Ed Week, can 
showcase the potential of CS for the entire school community, including families. The 
district can continue to support school and teacher leaders in planning and organizing 
school-wide CS events. In addition, PL for teachers could further emphasize how existing 
curricula and lessons map onto state learning standards in other content areas. 
Foster partnerships with outside groups to address resource limitations. Many of the 
schools we interviewed mentioned having a partnership with an outside organization or 
company in the computing field. At times, these partnerships allowed schools to expose 
students to computer science outside of regular school hours, providing curricular materials 
and technology that eventually helped them launch their own CS integration efforts during 
the school day. The district could target the schools lagging the most in CS participation 
and support them in activities (such as grant writing and networking) to forge partnerships 
with outside groups. 
Enhancing Efforts to Provide Middle and High School CS Instruction 
Make computer science required. Many high schools offering stand-alone courses did 
not have the staffing capacity to offer CS to all students and instead offered it only as an 
elective. Middle schools had even tighter scheduling constraints, as students in these 
grades have less room to take additional elective courses outside of those required, such 
as art and physical education. The schools that met the initiative’s goals by offering stand-
alone courses were able to make CS a requirement for all students. This often involved 
inventive scheduling solutions and challenging trade-offs about which courses not to offer. 
The district could build on growing efforts to support middle and high schools in integrating  
 
 

 
25 
CS into other core subject areas, such as math or science, to address some of these 
scheduling limitations and offer more entry points to participate in CS. In addition, it may be 
worthwhile to explore policy levers—such as making CS a graduation requirement—that 
could increase CS access and participation in high schools.  
Align CS with other school-wide instructional priorities. Many schools in NYC, 
specifically smaller high schools, are organized around a theme or a specific career path. In 
particular, CTE schools often have courses that students are required to take to earn 
professional credentials or licenses when they graduate. The schools that met the 
initiative’s goals were able to align CS with their school’s instructional priorities. Schools 
that had a theme that was not explicitly related to technology or computer science had to 
develop a vision that connected computer science, computational thinking, or technology to 
their school’s theme. The district can continue to support schools in developing this kind of 
vision through PL opportunities and communities of practice where school and teacher 
leaders share promising strategies. 
Build staffing capacity to offer more CS. Schools that offered sufficient CS courses for 
all students to take had to find staff to teach these courses. While attending CS4All PL was 
helpful in preparing more teachers to implement CS, trained teachers often taught CS 
alongside other core instructional courses that took precedence, such as math or science. 
The district could expand staffing capacity by offering PL that helps high school teachers 
learn how to integrate CS into other core subject areas. Moreover, given the changing state 
licensure requirements, the district can support school staffing capacity by ensuring that all 
teachers who have been or will be trained to offer stand-alone courses are certified to teach 
CS. 
This report underscores the critical importance of attending to school capacity limitations 
and structural barriers in order to increase access to and participation in CS education. As 
highlighted in our recommendations, a continued focus on school CS culture-building, 
offering PL and fostering communities of practice to strategize about implementation, and 
exploring district and state policy levers could all advance the initiative's goal of reaching 
CS for all. 
 
 
 

 
26 
References 
Fancsali, C. with Lee, J., Adair, A., Hill, K., Rivera-Cash, E., and Clough, S. (2022). CS4All: Examining Equity in 
Computer Science Access and Participation in NYC Schools. Research Alliance for New York City Schools. 
Available at: https://steinhardt.nyu.edu/research-alliance/research/cs4all-examining-equity  
Fancsali, C., Mark, J., & DeLyser, L. A. (March 2020). NYC CS4All: An early look at teacher implementation in 
one districtwide initiative. In 2020 Research on Equity and Sustained Participation in Engineering, Computing, 
and Technology (RESPECT), Vol. 1, 1–8. IEEE. 
Fergus, E. (2016). Solving Disproportionality and Achieving Equity: A Leader's Guide to Using Data to Change 
Hearts and Minds. Corwin Press. 
Israel, M., Liu, R., Yan, W., Sherwood, H., Martin, W., Fancsali, C., Rivera-Cash, E., & Adair, A. (2022). 
Understanding barriers to school-wide computational thinking integration at the elementary grades: Lessons 
from three schools. In Computational Thinking in PreK-5: Empirical Evidence for Integration and Future 
Directions, 64–71. 
Li, X., Fancsali, C., Lee, J., & Jain, R. (2025). CS4All: Evaluating the Outcomes of Students Taking Computer 
Science in NYC Schools. Research Alliance for New York City Schools. Available at: 
https://steinhardt.nyu.edu/research-alliance/research/cs4all-evaluating-outcomes-students-taking-computer-
science-nyc-schools  
Scherer, R., Siddiq, F., & Sánchez Viveros, B. (2019). The cognitive benefits of learning computer 
programming: A meta-analysis of transfer effects. Journal of Educational Psychology, 111(5), 764–792. 
  
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
The Research Alliance conducts 
rigorous studies on topics that matter to 
the City’s public schools. We strive to 
advance equity and excellence in 
education by providing nonpartisan 
evidence about policies and practices 
that promote students’ development and 
academic success. 
© 2025 Research Alliance for New York City Schools. All rights reserved. You may make copies of and distribute this 
work for non-commercial educational and scholarly purposes. For any other uses, including the making of derivative 
works, permission must be obtained from the Research Alliance for New York City Schools, unless fair use 
exceptions to copyright law apply. 
627 Broadway, 7th Floor 
New York, NY, 10012 
 
(212) 992-7697 
 
research.alliance@nyu.edu 
www.rancys.org 
