more 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
JOCELYN E. STRAUBER 
COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE Release #01-2025 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 8, 2025 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
  
 
DOI REPORT FINDS CONTINUING GAPS IN NYPD’S POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
CONCERNING ELECTED OFFICIALS’ SECURITY DETAILS  
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Investigation (“DOI”), 
issued a Report today concerning the policies and procedures of the New York City Police Department 
(“NYPD”) that govern its security detail protection for elected officials. DOI previously considered the 
appropriate uses of NYPD security details by elected public officials in a 2020 investigation and concluded 
that former Mayor Bill de Blasio repeatedly misused his security detail for personal benefit in violation of 
New York City’s Conflicts of Interest Law. In DOI’s 2021 report on that investigation, DOI identified a number 
of flaws in NYPD’s practices concerning security details for elected officials, including the lack of established 
rules or policies to guide NYPD personnel, minimal training for officers assigned to details, and numerous 
violations of City regulations concerning recordkeeping and retention. DOI recently investigated the use of 
security details by elected officials and reviewed the status of its 2021 recommendations, finding substantial 
and continuing gaps in NYPD’s policies and procedures concerning security details for elected officials . A 
copy of this Report follows the release and can be found at the fol lowing link: 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/doi/newsroom/public-reports.page  
 
DOI Commissioner Jocelyn E. Strauber sa id, “NYPD’s security details  ensure the safety of the 
City’s elected officials, a critical function that requires substantial public resources. For that reason, NYPD’s 
policies and procedures  must make clear the proper , and improper, uses of security details, and NYPD 
must provide comprehensive training to officers who provide security , both as to executive protection best 
practices and the unique ethical and legal restrictions applicable to security details for City officials. NYPD 
also must maintain proper written records concerning  the use of security details. Our Report shows 
continuing gaps in these areas and makes recommendations to improve NYPD’s practices that I urge NYPD 
to accept.” 
 
DOI found that NYPD has implemented or begun to implement some, but not all, of DOI’s 2021 
recommendations. In November 2022, in response to the 2021 Report, NYPD issued written guidance 
concerning how security details are assigned, the circumstances under which security should be declined, 
and the uses of a security detail. This written guidance, known as the “Protection Detail Guidelines,” or 
“PDGs,” is a major step forward in addressing DOI’s recommendations that NYPD create formal processes 
governing eligibility determinations, security declinations, and the usage of City personnel and resources, 
including the members of service who provide security and City -owned vehicles in which officials are 
transported. 
 
However, DOI found that certain issues identified in the 2021 report remain. These include:  
 

2 
 
• New NYPD guidance does not provide substantive information about the proper use 
of a security detail : The PDGs provide little useful information for either members of  
service assigned to security details, or the elected officials afforded protection. The PDGs 
state that details should be used for “official purposes only within the scope of the protection 
personnel’s employment with the [NYPD] as dictated by the Patrol Guide and other 
Department directives,” and that detail personnel “will follow the res ponsibilities and tasks 
as discussed by the training received.” However, neither the new policy nor other materials 
that DOI reviewed provide sufficient details concerning the meaning of “official purposes”, 
“scope of . . . employment”, or “responsibilities and tasks.” Thus, a lack of guidance to 
elected officials and service members persists, despite the 2021 Report’s conclusion that 
a lack of guidance is “the root of nearly all” the issues identified in DOI’s investigation of 
the former Mayor. 
 
• NYPD gives detail officers limited training: Interviews of NYPD Detectives assigned full-
time to the detail for an elected official, as well as their supervisors, revealed that those 
service members received minimal training—two or three total days of dignitary protection 
training, in some cases a decade or more prior to their current protection assignment. The 
members of service that DOI interviewed, as well as their supervisors, had little or no 
knowledge of the policies or practices governing security details. Consistent with these 
findings, NYPD documentation showed that its security detail training did not cover the 
ethical and legal restrictions applicable to security details.   
 
• NYPD does not maintain certain written records recommended by DOI’s 2021 report: 
NYPD has yet to fully implement DOI’s prior recommendations concerning recordkeeping, 
as evidenced by testimony from members of service that they do not maintain trip logs, 
tour summaries, or other records that would establish detail usage, destinations, o r other 
duties undertaken by detail members.  
 
DOI issued five  policy and procedure recommendations (“PPRs”)  in this report.  Three of these 
reiterated and expanded upon PPRs from DOI’s 2021 report  that have not yet been fully implemented , 
including recommendations that the NYPD:   
 
1. Further develop substantive guidance on the proper uses of security details : DOI 
recommended in its 2021 report that NYPD implement formal processes, including written 
records, for security detail eligibility determinations, declination of protection, and permitted 
detail usages. NYPD has begun to comply with this recommendation, but DOI found  the 
new PDGs have substantial gaps. DOI now recommends NYPD further develop the PDGs 
to reflect current executive protection best practices, based on consultation with outside 
experts, and to address the gaps identified by DOI in this Report. At a minimum, the PDGs 
should include su bstantive guidance for both members of service and protectees on the 
proper use of security details, reflecting the restrictions imposed by the City’s Conflicts Law 
on the use of City resources.   
 
2. Provide high -quality executive protection training to all members of service 
assigned to protective details : DOI reiterated a PPR from its  2021 Report that stated 
that NYPD should “Require and provide high -quality executive protection training to 
personnel assigned to the Executive Protection Unit[,] . . . ideally [] provided by experts 
outside the NYPD who have experience with best practices in establishing clear 
boundaries and navigating the challenges inherent to the detail -protectee relationship, in 
addition to effective techniques for protection.” DOI now additionally recommends  that 
NYPD require and provide such training to all personnel assigned to secu rity details of 
elected officials, both within and outside the Executive Protection Unit (“EPU.”)   
 
3. Maintain records for security detail usage:  DOI reiterated a recommendation from t he 
2021 Report that NYPD should “Maintain appropriate records establishing location and 
time of each stop when detail resources/personnel are in use, such as detailed memo 
books and car logs, as well as any other duties undertaken by EPU members.” DOI now 
also recommends that NYPD maintain appropriate records for all security details, whether 
3 
 
managed by EPU or otherwise, establishing location and time of each stop when detail 
resources and/or personnel are in use, such as detailed memo books and car logs, as well 
as any other duties undertaken by detail members. 
 
DOI also issued two new recommendations based on its review: 
 
4. Review and memorialize security determinations for elected officials: NYPD should 
promptly conduct a review to identify whether it has made written security determinations 
for all elected officials currently assigned security details. To the extent that such security 
determinations were not memorialized in writing or cannot be located, NYPD should 
promptly make such determinations (following a formal analysis consistent with this and 
the 2021 Report) and adjust assignments based on said process, if necessar y. 
 
5. Regularly update security determinations for elected officials: NYPD should regularly 
update its written security determinations for elected officials and adjust security details as 
necessary to reflect changes in identified threats (as determined by threat analyses), in 
light of the need to use limited government resources efficiently.  
 
NYPD indicated it could not fully implement PPR #2 as written due to the limited availability  of 
outside experts, including the U.S. Secret Service,  to conduct training . However, NYPD stated that it 
planned to extend its EPU training to all members of service assigned to security details , which would 
satisfy PPR #2 if the EPU training incorporates both the functional updates and legal restrictions identified 
in that PPR.  
 
NYPD has rejected PPR #3  concerning recordkeeping.  NYPD’s refusal to maintain the records 
recommended by PPR #3  is a substantial deviation from best practices established by other protective 
agencies, including the Secret Service, Diplomatic Security Service, and U.S. Marshals.  
 
Commissioner Strauber thanked NYPD Commissioner Jessica Tisch and her staff for their 
cooperation in this investigation. 
 
The investigation was conducted by Inspector General Daniel Kacinski with DOI’s Office of the 
Inspector General for Elected Officials and was supervised by Senior Inspector General Eleonora B. Rivkin, 
Deputy Commissioner of Strategic Initiatives Christopher Ryan , and Deputy Commissioner/Chief of 
Investigations Dominick Zarrella. 
 
 
DOI is one of the oldest law-enforcement agencies in the country and New York City’s corruption watchdog. Investigations 
may involve any agency, officer, elected official or employee of the City, as well as those who do business with or receive benefits 
from the City. DOI’s strategy attacks corruption comprehensively through systemic investigations that lead to high-impact arrests, 
preventive internal controls and operational reforms that improve the way the City runs. 
 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
  
 
  
 
New York City 
Department of Investigation 
 
Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD (OIG-NYPD) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overtime Under Review: 
NYPD Overtime and the Increased Risk of 
Negative Policing Outcomes  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jocelyn Strauber 
Commissioner 
 
Jeanene Barrett 
Acting Inspector General for the NYPD 
 
April 2023 
 
 
New York City 
Department of Investigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber 
Commissioner 
 
Eleonora B. Rivkin 
Inspector General for Elected Officials 
 
 
January 2025 
 
 
Investigation Concerning  
New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | i  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY...................................................................................................................................................... 1 
BACKGROUND ................................................................................................................................................................. 4 
 NYPD Provides Security Details to Certain City Elected Officials ..................................................... 4 
 DOI’s 2021 Report Found Widespread Misuse of the NYPD Security Detail Provided to Former 
Mayor Bill de Blasio................................................................................................................................ 4
 
 City Conflicts of Interest Law, Enforced by Conflicts of Interest Board, Limits the Use of City-
Provided Security Details ...................................................................................................................... 5 
 DOI’s 2021 Report Made Specific Policy and Procedural Recommendations Addressing Flaws 
in NYPD’s Processes Relating to Security Details .............................................................................. 7 
 NYPD Accepted Most of the Recommendations in the 2021 Report ................................................. 9 
 History of Instant Report ...................................................................................................................... 10 
FINDINGS ....................................................................................................................................................................... 12 
 NYPD Issued Written Guidance for Security Details in Response to DOI’s 2021 Report, But the 
Guidance Does Not Provide Substantive Information About the Proper Use of a Security Detail
................................................................................................................................................................ 12 
 Assigned Officers Unaware of Limits on Security Detail Use .......................................................... 13 
 Security Detail Officers Given Minimal Protection and Ethics Training by NYPD .......................... 16 
 NYPD Does Not Maintain Written Records Recommended by 2021 Report ................................... 19 
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS .......................................................................................................................... 21 
 
  
  
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 1  
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
The Department of Investigation (“DOI”) previously considered the 
appropriate—and inappropriate —uses of New York City Police Department 
(“NYPD”) security details by elected public officials in connection with its 2020 
investigation of former Mayor Bill de Blasio and his family.  In that investigation, 
DOI concluded that the former Mayor repeatedly misused his NYPD security detail 
for personal benefit in violation of New York City’s Conflicts of Interest Law.  DOI 
also identified a number of vulnerabilities in NYPD’s policies, procedures, and 
practices concerning security details for elected officials and made policy and 
procedural recommendations to NYPD to remedy those vulnerabilities, as discussed 
in DOI’s October 2021 Report (the “2021 Report”).  These findings included: NYPD 
had no established rules or policies to guide NYPD personnel assigned to security 
details; NYPD officers assigned to details had received minimal training; and NYPD 
engaged in numerous violations of City regulations concerning recordkeeping and 
retention with respect to details.  
The 2021 Report noted that “the provision of a standing security detail is 
potentially vu lnerable to corruption and misuse of public resources” and that 
“[a]ppropriate policies and practices can guard against these risks.”  DOI made a 
number of recommendations to address these risks and to ensure that NYPD followed 
best practices established b y federal protective services.  In particular, DOI 
recommended that NYPD should, among other proposals: implement a formal process 
for determining the eligibility of elected officials and others for security details; 
“[c]reate a clear, written policy” on t he usage of “detail resources and personnel” 
(meaning City-provided vehicles and members of service who staff security details); 
provide additional training to members of service that covered best practices in 
protection techniques and ethical challenges f or protectors and protectees; and 
maintain records of security details’ usage of City resources and personnel.  NYPD 
accepted most of DOI’s recommendations.   
DOI recently investigated the use of security details by elected officials.  In 
connection with t his investigation, DOI reviewed the status of its 2021 
recommendations, and found substantial continuing gaps in NYPD’s policies and 
procedures concerning security details for elected officials.  This Report is a summary 
of the findings of DOI’s investigation.  
 DOI found that NYPD has implemented or begun to implement some, but not 
all, of the prior recommendations.  Specifically, in November 2022, in response to the 
2021 Report, NYPD issued written guidance concerning how security details are 
assigned, the circumstances under which security should be declined, and the uses of 
a security detail.  This written guidance, known as the “Protection Detail Guidelines,” 
or “PDGs,” is a major step forward in addressing DOI’s recommendations that NYPD 
create formal processes governing eligibility determinations, security declinations, 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 2  
and the usage of City personnel and resources, including the members of service who 
provide security and City-owned vehicles in which officials are transported. 
However, DOI also found that certain issues identified in the 2021 report 
remain.  These include: 
• New NYPD Guidance Does Not Provide Substantive Information 
about the Proper Use of a Security Detail: DOI found that the new 
NYPD guidance provides little useful information for either members of 
service assigned to security details or the elected officials afforded  
protection.  While the PDGs state that details should be used for “official 
purposes only within the scope of the protection personnel’s employment 
with the [NYPD] as dictated by the Patrol Guide and other Department 
directives,” and that detail personnel “will follow the responsibilities 
and tasks as discussed by the training received,” neither the new policy 
nor other materials provided by NYPD to DOI provide sufficient details 
concerning the meaning of “official purposes,” “scope of . . . employment,” 
or “responsibilities and tasks.”  Thus a lack of guidance to elected 
officials and service members persists,  despite the 2021 Report’s 
conclusion that a lack of guidance i s “the root of nearly all” the issues 
identified in DOI’s investigation of the former Mayor.  
• NYPD Gives Detail Officers Limited Training : DOI found that 
NYPD provides limited training to members of service assigned to 
security details.  Interviews of NYPD  Detectives assigned full -time to 
the detail for an elected official, as well as their supervisors, revealed 
that those service members received minimal training —two or three 
total days of dignitary protection training, in some cases a decade or 
more prior to their current protection assignment. The members of 
service that DOI interviewed, as well as their supervisors, had little or 
no knowledge of the policies or practices governing security 
details.  Consistent with these findings, NYPD documentation show ed 
that its security detail training did not cover the ethical and legal 
restrictions applicable to security details.   
• NYPD Does Not Maintain Certain Written Records 
Recommended by 2021 Report: DOI found that NYPD has yet to fully 
implement DOI’s prior recommendations concerning recordkeeping, as 
evidenced by testimony from members of service that they do not 
maintain trip logs, tour summaries, or other records that would 
establish detail usage, destinations, or other duties undertaken by detail 
members.  
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 3  
Based on these findings, DOI both reiterates its policy and procedure 
recommendations (“PPRs”) from the 2021 Report and makes new PPRs to address the 
remaining issues.  These PPRs include recommendations that NYPD:  
• Develop the PDGs to reflect current exec utive protection best practices 
and address the gaps identified by DOI in this report, including 
substantive guidance on the proper use of security details reflecting the 
restrictions imposed by the City’s Conflicts Law on the use of City 
resources; 
• Regularly provide training on executive protection techniques and 
applicable ethical restrictions to all members of service assigned to 
security details, at intervals consistent with other protective agencies; 
and 
• Maintain appropriate records for all security de tails, including written 
documentation of regularly -updated security determinations for 
protectees, as required by the City’s Conflict of Interest Law, and 
individual security details’ use of City resources and personnel, 
particularly City-owned vehicles and members of service themselves.  
DOI provided a draft of this report to the NYPD for its comments and 
responses.  NYPD provided comments on two of the PPRs, as well as some additional 
information, all of which has been incorporated, as appropriate, in this report.  
 
  
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 4  
BACKGROUND 
 NYPD Provides Security Details to Certain City Elected Officials  
The New York City Police Department (“NYPD”) provides security to 
designated New York City (“City”) officials and, in some cases, their family members.  
Units within the NYPD Intelligence Bureau staff and supervise full -time security 
details for the Mayor, Comptroller, Public Advocate, and Speaker of the City Council, 
using multiple members of service and vehicles.   Security for the Mayor and, if 
necessary, thei r family members, is provided by the Executive Protection Unit 
(“EPU”).1  The Threat Assessment and Protection Unit (“TAPU”) provides details for 
the Comptroller, Public Advocate, and Speaker.   TAPU is also responsible for 
providing security to other non-City dignitaries, such as diplomats and heads of state, 
and for “conduct[ing] the dignitary protection training for all members of the 
NYPD.”  TAPU also provides  training to members of service assigned to other 
bureaus that staff security details for elected officials.2  The security details provided 
to District Attorneys for New York, Kings, Queens, Bronx, and Richmond Counties 
are staffed by detectives assigned to the respective District Attorneys’ Detective 
Squads (“DA Squads”), under the command of the N YPD Detective Bureau, a 
separate division within NYPD.  According to NYPD, “detectives in the [DA Squads] 
may be assigned to security details at the request of their respective DAs.”
3  The 
Intelligence Bureau is not involved in the day-to-day management of security details 
provided by DA Squads.  
 DOI’s 2021 Report Found Widespread Misuse of the NYPD Security Detail Provided to Former 
Mayor Bill de Blasio 
In October 2021, DOI issued a report entitled DOI’s Investigation into Mayor 
de Blasio’s Security Detail , (the “2021 Report”).  The 2021 Report examined 
allegations concerning the use of City-provided security and vehicles by former Mayor 
Bill de Blasio, his immediate family members, and mayoral staff.   
In relevant part, DOI found that the former Mayor had repeatedly misused his 
City-provided security detail for personal benefit.  As discussed in the 2021 Report, 
the Mayor and First Lady are “entitled to appropriate security protection” which 
                                            
1 For a detailed discussion of the structure of the EPU and NYPD security details, see Department of 
Investigation (“DOI”), DOI’s Investigation into Mayor de Blasio’s Security Detail (Oct. 2021), 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/press-releases/2021/October/DOI_Report_re_Security_Detail.pdf 
(“2021 Report”) at 5. 
2 Behind the Badge: Patricia MacDonald ‘20 Deputy Inspector, Intelligence Bureau, John Jay College 
of Criminal Justice, https://www.jjay.cuny.edu/news-events/news/behind-badge-patricia-macdonald-
20-deputy-inspector%2C-intelligence-bureau (accessed Dec. 2, 2024).   
3 Letter from NYPD to DOI dated March 7, 2024 (“RFI Resp.”). 
 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 5  
“serves an official purpose,”4 provided that security details and vehicles are used in a 
manner consistent with the City Charter’s prohibitions on use of City resources for 
personal benefit.5   
DOI found multiple instances where the former Mayor’s security detail was 
used for impermissible personal benefit, constituting potential violations of the City’s 
Conflicts of Interest Law, as reflected in Chapter 68 of the City Charter (“Chapter 
68”) and the Conflicts of Interest Board Rules.6   
DOI referred its findings to relevant authorities, including the Conflicts of 
Interest Board (the “COIB”).  On June 15, 2023, the COIB found that De Blasio’s 
“conduct plainly violates” the City’s Conflict of Interest Law, holding that “there is no 
City purpose in paying the extra expenses incurred by [his] NYPD security detail to 
travel at a distance from the City to accompany the Mayor or his family on trips for 
his campaign for President.”
7  In May 2023, a City Administrative Law Judge found 
that former Mayor de Blasio had violated the City’s Conflict of Interest law and 
recommended that h e pay the City $474,794.20, including reimbursement of the 
$319,794.20 expended by the City for the out -of-state detail usage, and a $155,000 
fine.  COIB adopted these findings and recommendations in June 2023. 8  Former 
Mayor de Blasio has challenged the imposition of this fine; that proceeding is 
pending.9 
 City Conflicts of Interest Law, Enforced by Conflicts of Interest Board, Limits the Use of City-
Provided Security Details  
 The City Charter establishes fundamental limits on the usage of all City 
resources, including security details and vehicles.  These limitations are designed to 
ensure that public servants —including elected officials —do not personally benefit 
from their public position in a manner that is improper.  The Charter states that:  
No public servant shall engage in any business, transaction or private 
employment, or have any financial or other private interest, direct or 
                                            
4 2021 Report at 42. 
5 2021 Report at 6-7 (discussing applicable rules).  
6 Id. at 43.  
7 Final Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order at 2, Matter of Bill de Blasio, COIB No. 2019-
503, OATH Index No. 587/23 (June 15, 2023), https://www.nyc.gov/assets/coib/downloads/pdf4/enf -
dis/2019-503.pdf (“De Blasio Order”).  
8 See id.  
9 See De Blasio v. COIB, No. 155404/2023 (Sup. Ct., N.Y. Cty., June 13, 2023).  
 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 6  
indirect, which is in conflict with the proper discharge of his or her 
official duties. 
No public servant shall use or attempt to use his or her position as a 
public servant to obtain any financial gain, contract, license, privilege or 
other private or personal advantage, direct or indirect, for the public 
servant or any person or firm associated with the public servant.
10 
Similarly, the COIB Rules establish that it is a violation of the City’s Conflicts 
Law for “any public servant to use City letterhead, title, personnel, equipment , 
resources, supplies, or technology assets for any non -City purpose.”11  Officials are 
also prohibited from asking others to use City resources, or equipment for a personal 
purpose—for example, to run errands or conduct personal tasks. 12  
In sum, City employees —including elected officials —cannot use City time or 
resources for personal purposes.  The application of this restriction is broad: City 
employees cannot ask public servants to run errands for them, to help with moving 
furniture, or to take any other action that personally benefits the elected 
official.  This limitation also applies to the use of City -provided resources, such as 
vehicles: the COIB has repeatedly made clear that, as a general rule, City -issued 
vehicles can only be used for official duties and commuting, not personal trips or 
errands.
13   
The COIB provides a limited exception to the general rule for the use of City -
provided vehicles by elected officials, where the City vehicle is provided for security 
(i.e., as part of a security detail) or for non-security purposes (i.e., a City fleet vehicle 
used by an elected official).  In a 2009 advisory opinion, the COIB established that “it 
will not violate Chapter 68 for . . . Elected Officials to use their City cars for personal 
as well as official purposes, recognizing that their full and varied schedules makes 
changing from official to personal vehicles impractical and inefficient.”
14 
However, the 2009 advisory opinion also established certain bright line rules 
concerning how City vehicles should be used.  City vehicles can only be used in 
                                            
10 Charter §§ 2604(b)(2), (b)(3). 
11 Conflicts of Interest Board Rules  (“COIB Rules”) § 1-13 (emphasis added).   
12 Id., § 1-17.   
13 See, e.g. , COIB v. Licitra , No. 2017- 537 (Mar. 23, 2018) (finding violation where DEP employee 
“treated the DEP vehicle as if it was his own personal vehicle”); COIB v. Ponte, No. 2017-156 (July 12, 
2018) (issuing $18,500 fine to DOC Commissioner for using vehicle on multiple personal trips); COIB 
v. Bracy, No. 2017-903 (July 9, 2019) (issuing $5,000 fine to EDC employee who used City vehicle to 
commute to second, non-City job).  
14 COIB, Advisory Opinion No. 2009-1 (Mar. 12, 2009) at 12, https://www.nyc.gov/assets/coib/downloa
ds/pdf5/aos/2004-2013/AO2009_1.pdf (“2009-1”). 
 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 7  
connection with activities that “do[] not otherwise res ult in a conflict of 
interest.”  Further, the COIB made clear that other people, including family members 
or other passengers present for a non-City purpose, could accompany elected officials 
in their vehicles without violating the City’s ethics rules, but  that any use of the 
vehicle without the elected official present was prohibited.15   
 DOI’s 2021 Report Made Specific Policy and Procedural Recommendations Addressing Flaws 
in NYPD’s Processes Relating to Security Details  
DOI’s prior investigation discovered significant vulnerabilities in the NYPD’s 
policies, procedures, and practices relating to security details.  Although the 2021 
DOI report focused on the EPU and the then-Mayor’s misuse of that detail, the policy 
and procedure recommendations issued to t he NYPD are equally applicable to the 
day-to-day operation of the security details provided by the Intelligence Bureau and 
Detective Bureau to other elected officials.  
Three findings of the prior report are relevant here.  First, the 2021 Report 
found that the NYPD had no established rules or policies to guide NYPD personnel 
assigned to security details.  The 2021 Report made clear that “the root of nearly all 
of the[] issues” identified by DOI was the “complete lack of any written policies or 
procedures at the NYPD for the operation of the mayoral security detail.”
16   
As the 2021 Report noted, the absence of such policies and rules deviated from 
best practices as established by federal protective agencies, which maintain such 
written policies.
17 For example, representatives of the United States Secret Service, 
the Department of State Bureau of Diplomatic Security, and the United States 
Marshals Service all have formal processes for determining which individuals are 
entitled to security, the level of security  needed for each protectee, and how an 
individual can decline protection.
18  At the time of the 2021 Report, NYPD did not 
have any such formal processes.  
Second, the Report concluded that the NYPD officers assigned to protective 
details had received minimal training.  According to the NYPD, members of a security 
                                            
15 Id. at 10 (“[A] public official . . . may not send a City car with security personnel or a City driver on 
personal errands for the official or utilize the car and/or drive to transport members of the official’s 
family to and from their daily pursuits; taking the official’s children to school or the dentist, or 
dropping the official’s spouse off at a destination, is not permitted, unless the Elected Official is in the 
car at the time or unless . . . the NYPD has determined that the official ’s family member has an 
independent security need.”). 
16 2021 Report at 43.  
17 Id. at 7-10.  
18 Id. at 8.  
 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 8  
details are required to take a “two-day ‘dignitary protection training course’”19at some 
point in their career. There is no requirement that detectives assigned to protective 
details have any recent,  supplemental or continuing training in any aspect of 
executive protection.   Many of the officers assigned to protect the mayor had not 
received any additional training beyond this initial course which, in some cases, 
officers had taken more than seven years prior.20    
Third, DOI found numerous violations of City regulations concerning 
recordkeeping and retention.  In particular, DOI found widespread use of encrypted 
text messaging applications such as WhatsApp and Signal for official business, in 
violation of Charter requirements for record retention and disposal.21   
To address these issues, DOI made a number of recommendations.  Among 
these, DOI recommended that the NYPD “consult with experts on official protection 
outside of the NYPD to develop and adopt improved practices for standing or long -
term security details.”22  DOI further recommended specific steps that NYPD should 
take, including to:  
• “Implement a formal process, including written records, for determining 
eligibility for standing or long-term security detail protection” made by persons 
other than those serving on or directly supervising those details, 
• “Implement a formal process, including written records, for declination of a 
security detail,” 
• “Create a clear written policy regarding permitted use of detail resources and 
personnel[, c]onvey that policy to current protectees, and create a standardized 
procedure for conveying that policy to future protectees,” 
                                            
19 Id. at 45, footnote 37. 
20 Id.  
21 Id. at 30-42. The 2021 Report also detailed obstruction of DOI’s investigation, including criminal 
conduct by the former head of the EPU, NYPD Inspector Howard Redmond.  Redmond pleaded guilty 
in August 2023 to six criminal offenses in connection with his obstruction of DOI’s investigation: two 
counts of Tampering with Physical Evidence, a Class E felony, two counts of Obstructing 
Governmental Administration in the Second Degree, a class A misdemeanor, and two counts of Official 
Misconduct, a class A misdemeanor. Press Release, D.A. Bragg Announces Guilty Plea and Sentencing 
of Former Chief of Mayor De Blasio’s Security Detail, New York County District Attorney 
(Aug. 9, 2023), https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/press-releases/2023/August/Howard%20Redmond.pdf 
(“Redmond Release”).  As part of his plea agreement, Redmond was terminated from the NYPD, 
ordered to perform community  service, and made a formal apology to DOI for “not taking [DOI’s] 
investigation seriously, and not providing them with the information that they needed and required 
for their investigation.”  Transcript at 14:11-15, People v. Redmond, No. CR-022321-23 (Sup. Ct. N.Y. 
Cty. Aug. 9, 2023). 
22 2021 Report at 44, PPR #2.  
 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 9  
• “Require and provide high-quality executive protection training to personnel 
assigned to the Executive Protection Unit, . . . ideally [] provided by experts 
outside the NYPD who have experience with best practices in establishing 
clear boundaries and navigating the challenges inherent to the detail-protectee 
relationship, in addition to effective techniques for protection,” 
• “Maintain appropriate records establishing location and time of each stop 
when detail resources/personnel are in use, such as detailed memo books and 
car logs, as well as any other duties undertaken by [detail] members,”
  
• “Establish an automatic rotation system of two to three years’ service for all 
NYPD members assigned to the EPU,” and 
• “[C]reate a policy concerning out -of-state travel records at the NYPD,” 
ensuring that any such records “specify the purpose of the travel, especially for 
trips that require any reimbursements to the City.”23 
 NYPD Accepted Most of the Recommendations in the 2021 Report  
While the NYPD disagreed with the findings of DOI’s 2021 Report, it accepted 
most of the policy and procedure recommendations .  NYPD stated that it “plan[ned] 
to introduce a formal threat assessment policy,” and would create a “written policy 
which will specify how security details are to be used, . . . notifications and advance 
sharing of schedules, . . . and include guidance for out-of-state travel for officials other 
than the mayor.” 24  NYPD further committed to provide training on the threat 
assessment and detail usage policies as part of its standard “NYPD Dignitary 
Protection training.”25   
The NYPD rejected some of the recommendations in whole or in part.  As to 
recordkeeping, the NYPD claimed that since its “Intelligence Bureau already has a 
system in place to determine which personnel were working on a specific date and 
with whom they were working,” it would not maintain re cords of how details and 
their resources were used.
26  NYPD further did not commit to obtaining outside 
training for its executive protection officers, stating only that its “trainers received 
the training course offered by either the US Secret Service or the US Department of 
                                            
23 Id. at 44, PPR #2, 3.  DOI further requested that the COIB publicly release further public guidance 
concerning the use of City resources in connection with political activities, and if such gu idance 
provided for reimbursement, that the COIB include a timeline for such reimbursements and the 
parties responsible. 
24 Letter from NYPD to DOI dated Dec. 3, 2021 (“NYPD Resp.”) at 4.  
25 Id. at 5.  
26 Id. 
 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 10  
State Diplomatic Security Service.”27  Finally, NYPD rejected the recommendation to 
rotate members of the EPU details, claiming that it would “operate in accordance 
with accepted practices of other law enforcement agencies.”28   
The NYPD also disputed certain factual and legal assertions in the DOI report.  
For example, in a December 3, 2021 letter, NYPD Deputy Commissioner for Legal 
Matters Ernest Hart took the position that “[n]either the NYPD, nor the City 
Charter” limits the use of vehicles provided by the City to elected officials when that 
official is not present.  DOI disagrees with that assertion in light of the COIB’s clear 
statement in its 2009 advisory opinion that the Charter does include such a 
limitation.29     
NYPD also indicated that DOI’s report “invites the risk that security decisions 
would be made based on what [an] individual or campaign could afford rather than 
the judgment of trained security professionals.”30  DOI also disputes that claim.  To 
the contrary, DOI made cle ar in the 2021 Report that “[n]o reasonable person 
disputes that the Mayor of New York City should have security protection and that 
providing such protection, consistent with the City’s ethics rules, is in the interest of 
the City.”
31  DOI’s findings included that the former Mayor used his detail in a 
manner inconsistent with the City’s ethics rules, a conclusion that NYPD did not 
dispute.   
 History of Instant Report 
Following the publication of the 2021 Report, DOI conducted further 
investigation to review the status of its security detail-related recommendations.  In 
the course of its investigation (the “Review”), DOI reviewed documents from the 
NYPD and other sources, conducted interviews of NYPD personnel assigned to a 
security detail and their supervisors, including a Lieutenant in charge of a detail, a 
Deputy Inspector supervising a detail, and a Lieutenant assigned to TAPU.
32  
                                            
27 Id. 
28 Id. 
29 2009-1 at 10 (“Absent an independent security need as determined by the NYPD, a public official 
within this category may not send a City car with security personnel or a City driver on personal 
errands for the official or utilize the car and/or driver to transport members of the official’s family to 
and from their own daily pursuits; taking the official’s children to school or the dentist, or dropping 
the official’s spouse off at a destination, is not permitted, unless the Elected Official is in the car at the 
time or unless, as noted, the NYPD has determined that the official’s family member has an 
independent security need.”).  
30 NYPD Resp. at 3. 
31 2021 Report at 42 (emphasis added).  
32 A NYPD representative was present for and observed all interviews of members of service.  
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 11  
The Review shed light on the extent to which NYPD implemented the 
recommendations made in the 2021 Report, and led to additional  DOI findings and 
recommendations that are summarized in this report. 
  
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 12  
FINDINGS 
 NYPD Issued Written Guidance for Security Details in Response to DOI’s 2021 Report, But the 
Guidance Does Not Provide Substantive Information About the Proper Use of a Security Detail  
The NYPD has made some progress addressing the issues identified in the 
2021 Report.  NYPD created “Protection Detail Guidelines” issued in November 2022 
(the “PDGs” or the “Guidelines”).33  According to NYPD, the PDGs have been provided 
to “designated protectee[s] and members of their staff.” 34  NYPD further informed 
DOI that the PDGs were “developed partly in response to the recommendations 
resulting [from] . . . DOI’s inquiry into the Mayoral Protection Detail.”  
The PDGs are a major step forward in addressing DOI’s recommendations that 
NYPD create formal processes governing eligibility determinations, security 
declinations, and the usage of City personnel and resources, including the members 
of service who provide security and City -owned vehicles.
35  For eligibility purposes, 
the Guidelines now set out basic factors to consider when “making a determination 
to provide a protection detail,”
36 and specify that the Police Commissioner makes 
“[t]he final decision as to whether an individual will be granted a protection detail.”  
The PDGs also establish that any person “deemed eligible for a protection detail” can 
decline it at any time and, critically, that such declination must be “memorialized in 
a report containing the date, time, and reasons for the declination or termination of 
the security detail.”
37  The Guidelines further make clear that “[t]he protection detail 
is to be used for official purposes only.”38  
However, the PDGs do not fully address gaps in security detail policy and 
procedure identified in the 2021 Report.  Of particular concern, the PDGs do not 
provide detectives with substantive guidance on the appropriate use a security detail 
by an elected official.  The 2021 Report, in large part, addressed the use of security 
details by elec ted officials for improper purposes —namely the use of the former 
Mayor’s security detail for matters that did not involve official business and were not 
                                            
33 Intelligence Bureau Protection Detail Guidelines , (produced by NYPD Nov. 15, 2022) (“PDGs”) at 1.  
The NYPD confirmed that the November 2022 PDGs remain in effect and have not been revised since 
publication.  RFI Resp. at 1.  
NYPD contends that the PDGs are “Law Enforcement Sensitive and Confidential” and “ask[ed] 
that the policy or the information contained therein not be disclosed without prior written consent 
from the NYPD.  For this reason, DOI is withholding certain specifics of the PDGs.  
34 RFI Resp. at 2.  
35 See 2021 Report at 44-45, PPR 2(c) (DOI recommends NYPD “Create a clear written policy regarding 
permitted use of detail resources and personnel . . . .”).  
36 PDGs at 1.  
37 Id. at 2.  
38 Id. (emphasis added).  
 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 13  
otherwise permitted, such that the use was for personal benefit, and prohibited by 
the Conflicts of Int erest Law.  The PDGs appear to acknowledge the importance of 
ensuring the proper use of details, as they state that a protection detail “is to be used 
for official purposes only within the scope of the protection personnel’s employment 
with the [NYPD] as d ictated by the Patrol Guide and other Department directives,” 
and that detail personnel “will follow the responsibilities and tasks as discussed by 
the training received.”
39  
Despite these general directives, the PDGs fail to give sufficiently specific 
guidance to the Detectives who are assigned to security details as to what “official 
purposes” are, to what the “scope of . . . employment” refers, or what the 
“responsibilities and tasks” are outlined in training.  DOI reviewed the other sources 
to which the PDGs refer —the Patrol Guide, “other Department directives,” and 
training materials—and found that those sources also fail to address the proper and 
improper uses of a detail.
40   
  DOI emphasized in the 2021 Report that “the root of nearly all” of the issues 
identified by DOI relating to security details is the lack of guidance to both elected 
officials and the members of service sworn to protect them.  While NYPD has made 
some improvements in the guidance provided, in DOI’s view that guidance is still 
insufficient to address key issues, such as the appropriate uses of a security detail.  
DOI therefore recommends, as set forth further below, that NYPD promptly address 
these gaps in the Guidelines for the benefit of both protector and protectee alike.  
 Assigned Officers Unaware of Limits on Security Detail Use  
 The City’s Conflicts of Interest Law imposes limits on the use of City resources, 
including security details.  During this Review, however, DOI found that members of 
service responsible for providing protection to elected officials were unaware of 
restrictions on the use of security details.  In an interview with DOI, a TAPU official 
said that detail supervisors were responsible for ensuring that members of service 
knew the rules and regulations applicab le to dignitary protection, including 
restrictions on detail use.  However, four of the five members of service serving on or 
supervising security details  interviewed by DOI during this Review, including the 
Deputy Inspector and Lieutenant responsible for supervising a security detail, said 
that they were unaware of any rules, regulations, or limitations on the use of a 
security detail: 
                                            
39 Id.  
40 Id. 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 14  
DOI: Are you aware of any rules, policies, or laws about dignitary protection for 
elected officials? 
Deputy Inspector: No. 
*  * * 
DOI: To the best of your knowledge, are there any rules or policies about dignitary 
protection for elected officials? 
 
Lieutenant: If there is, I wouldn’t know where they are. 
*  * * 
DOI: To the best of your knowledge, are there any rules or  policies concerning 
dignitary protection? 
Detective 1: I don’t recall. 
DOI: Okay, are you aware of any specific rules or policies for dignitary protection 
of elected officials? 
Detective 1: I don’t recall that either. 
*  * * 
DOI: To the best of your knowledge, are you aware of any rules or policies about 
dignitary protection for elected officials? 
Detective 2: No. 
*  * * 
DOI: Do you know of any written rules or written policies applying to the provision 
of dignitary protection for elected officials? 
Detective 3: No. 
 Only one of the five members of service interviewed identified any limit on the 
use of details, correctly noting that a detail -issued vehicle should not be used to 
transport non-protecteees, unless the protectee is in the car.  However, the member 
of service did not point to any rule or training as the basis for that restriction; rather, 
it was “just the way it is”: 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 15  
DOI: To the best of your knowledge, . . . are there any rules or policies about 
dignitary protection for elected officials? 
Detective 4: That I don’t know from my perspective. The only rules that we go by 
is, ensure the safety that every night, the protectee gets home safely. 
DOI: But let me back up.  When you did that training, I know it was back in 2005, 
it was a long time ago. They didn’t, you know, say, here’s a guidebook, or here’s a 
policy, or here’s the rules for dignitary protection, or anything like that? 
Detective 4: There are things that we can’t do and we shouldn’t do. I can’t speak for 
everybody else, but there are things that we are told we’re not supposed to do. Like 
when you’re in a protection mode you have to be here not be there.  
DOI: In terms of the things you’re told you are not supposed to do, beyond the 
physical act of providing security, have you been told that there are certain things 
you cannot do even if the protectee asks you to do it? 
Detective 4: Can you be more specific? 
DOI: For example, let’s say, the protectee asks you to drive their friend home from 
a private event. Are you allowed to do that? 
Detective 4: Not if the protectee is not in the car. 
DOI: Okay, that’s what I’m getting at, if there any sort of rules like that. . . . What 
is the reason that you’re not allowed to drive someone when the protectee is not in 
the car? 
Detective 4: Well, my responsibility is solely for the protectee.  
DOI: But have you been directed or told to say, like, No, you’re not allowed to drive 
people when the protectee is not in the car? 
 . . .  
Detective 4: Okay. So, in regard to the question that  you asked, in terms of my 
training and specific manuals and everything. I don’t recall ever being specifically 
told that you can’t do that, but I do know that other than the protectee, nobody 
should be in the car by themselves without [the protectee] bein g in the car. I do 
know that for a fact.  
DOI: How do you know that I guess is my question.  
Detective 4: It is just the way it is. 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 16  
 Without knowing the appropriate use of a security detail, and the limitations 
on that use, there is a significant risk that elected officials and members of service 
may use a security detail inappropriately.  At minimum, the lack of awareness of the 
officers interviewed by DOI suggests that members of service assigned to security 
details are not receiving sufficient guidance or training on all aspects of their role.  
Moreover, DOI has no reason to believe that the identified absence of knowledge on 
these topics is limited solely to one unit.  Rather, as discussed further below, the lack 
of knowledge appears linked to deficits in NYPD’s dignitary protection training for 
members of service. 
 Security Detail Officers Given Minimal Protection and Ethics Training by NYPD 
In the 2021 Report, DOI found substantial deficiencies in the training that 
NYPD provided to members of service assigned to security details.  The 2021 Report 
noted that EPU members protecting the Mayor had received limited dignitary 
protection training, which in most cases had occurred many years prior:  
During the course of its investigation, DOI requested information from 
the NYPD about the professional trainings offered to members of the EPU 
and UOU. The NYPD responded that its Intelligence Bureau offers a two-
day “dignitary protection training course,” and that this training “is 
currently the only required training” for members of the EPU. The 
NYPD’s response listed just 15 EPU members, including only two of the 
EPU’s three sergeants, who have received this training since January 1, 
2013. The majority received the training in 2013 or 2014. It does not 
appear that EPU members have received any additional professional 
training since that time.
41 
Given this finding, DOI recommended that NYPD ensure t hat officers assigned to 
security details receive “high -quality executive protection training, . . . ideally by 
experts outside the NYPD who have experience with best practices in establishing 
clear boundaries and navigating the challenges inherent to the detail -protectee 
relationship, in addition to effective techniques for protection.”
42 
NYPD did not agree to implement this recommendation in full.  NYPD stated 
that “[t]he NYPD’s Dignitary Protection Training, which is given by the Intelligence 
Bureau, is highly regarded and sought after by many law enforcement agencies,” and 
that its trainers were trained by federal protective agencies.  NYPD did state that, 
moving forward, the training provided by NYPD would cover the proper detail use 
and security eligibility.
43  DOI understood that NYPD was agreeing to add some 
                                            
41 2021 Report at 45, footnote 37. 
42 Id. at 45, PPR #2D.  
43 NYPD Resp. at 4-5.  
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 17  
additional information to its trainings, but that NYPD otherwise believed that its 
existing dignitary protection training was sufficient.  
Based on materials provided by NYPD , which were comprised o f the 
presentation given at the training and a handbook provided to members of service,  
the “Dignitary Protection Training Course” consists of eight lectures over ten and a 
half hours.  The training covers topics including “history,” “theory,” “formations, ” 
“operational security,” and “attire.”  NYPD also told DOI that the training includes 
“practical demonstrations,” but that no documentation existed for said 
demonstrations.   
This Review raised significant questions about whether the dignitary 
protection training given to NYPD members of service is, in fact, sufficient.  For one, 
members of service appear to receive minimal, if any, training on the ethical and legal 
restrictions applicable to security details.  As part of this Review, DOI requested that 
NYPD identify any training materials provided either to protectees or NYPD officers 
that relate to the appropriate uses of a security detail.  In response, NYPD provided 
copies o f the training materials used in the Intelligence Bureau’s “Dignitary 
Protection Training Course” referenced in the paragraph above.  DOI reviewed these 
materials and found that the ethical and legal limitations on security detail usage 
are never directly discussed.  In 423 pages of content,
44 the only potentially relevant 
guidance members of service are given is a reminder to follow Patrol Guide Procedure 
203-06, which sets out prohibited conduct while on duty.  That procedure notes, 
among 21 other unrelate d prohibitions, that “Using [NYPD] letterhead, personnel, 
equipment, resources, or supplies for any non -Department purpose or non -city 
purpose” is prohibited.
45  
Consistent with the materials provided by NYPD, DOI interviewed certain 
members of service assi gned to security details and found that they were given 
minimal if any guidance on the City ethics rules applicable to security details.  The 
members of service interviewed told DOI that the sum total of dignitary protection 
training provided by NYPD was a two or three-day training given by the Intelligence 
Bureau.  This is consistent with the training materials provided by NYPD.  When 
asked to describe the lessons learned from that training, the members of service 
described basic instruction on threat identification, body protection, and driving, but 
nothing on detail eligibility, declining protection, proper detail use, or appropriate 
boundaries between detail members and their protectee.  As noted above, this is again 
consistent with the NYPD training mat erials, which do not include any mention of 
ethical or legal restrictions on detail usage.  These findings are entirely consistent 
with those in the 2021 Report, which similarly found that members of service 
                                            
44 NYPD provided 600 pages of materials, at least 177 of which included no content.  
45 Patrol Guide Procedure 203-06 at 2.  
 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 18  
assigned to protect the Mayor had received only two days of training on dignitary 
protection, many years prior.46   
DOI further found that the security detail members interviewed had not 
recently received training on dignitary protection, if any.   Four members of service 
told DOI that their dignitary pro tection training occurred ten or more years prior, 
without any refreshers or updates in the intervening decade.  One member of service 
interviewed by DOI was assigned to provide dignitary protection without receiving 
any dignitary protection training.  That member of service did not receive the 
standard dignitary protection training until six months after they joined a detail.  It is 
unclear whether the training provided at that point was useful, because the member 
of service could not recall whether there were any rules or policies governing their 
protection of elected officials when interviewed approximately a month after the 
training. 
Based on the interviews of the members of service assigned to security details, 
it appears  that NYPD is not providing adequate training on the rules and policies for 
security details because members of service do not appear to be fully aware of the 
applicable rules and policies.   In light of those interviews, DOI has significant 
concerns about the sufficiency of the training provided to members of service.  NYPD 
must ensure that officers have the tools and knowledge to provide effective protection 
to elected officials as well as an awareness of activities that fall outside protective 
detail duties, consistent with applicable City ethics rules. 
In response, NYPD contended this finding did not adequately reflect the nature 
of training that members of service on  security details receive.   NYPD specifically 
sought to highlight ‘on- the-job’ training that some members of service obt ain by 
participating in high profile dignitary protection assignments  in tandem with other 
protective agencies, such as the Secret Service (“USSS”) and the Diplomatic Security 
Service (“DSS”).  NYPD also noted that some members of service attend  USSS and 
DSS training courses. 
While DOI commends NYPD for providing additional  training opportunities, 
they do not fully address DOI’s concerns about training for members of service on 
City elected official security details.  For one, NYPD has stated that it cannot obtain 
external training for all members of service assigned to security details as the supply 
of training slots is  limited by the external providers .
47  And  further, members of 
service assigned to City elected official details have limited opportunities to serve on 
higher-profile details with external partners .  A NYPD official confirmed that 
                                            
46 2021 Report at 45, footnote 37. 
47 Letter from NYPD to DOI dated May 3, 2024 (“NYPD Draft Comments”).  NYPD also informed DOI 
that it does not maintain records of external trainings.  As such, NYPD cannot conclusively identify 
which members of service have completed external trainings offered by USSS, DSS or other protective 
agencies. 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 19  
members of service protecting a City elected official could only work on a different 
detail if their assigned elected official was outside the City, and if a need existed at 
that time  for additional personnel to assist with a joint operation.   In short, it is 
uncertain whether members of service assigned to City elected official details would 
receive these additional training opportunities , as opposed to the NYPD dignitary 
protection course which is given to all such members of service.  
 NYPD Does Not Maintain Written Records Recommended by 2021 Report 
The 2021 Report also identified flaws in NYPD’s record-keeping practices with 
respect to security details generally and the members of the Mayor’s security detail 
specifically.  The 2021 Report also noted that NYPD did not keep basic records with 
respect to the daily movements or activities of security details.
48  As the 2021 Report 
made clear, this lack of recordkeeping is a substantial deviation from best practices .  
In contrast, the policies of the Secret Service, Diplomatic Security Service, and U.S. 
Marshals “all included a means of recording and maintaining records of all vehicles 
used, pe rsonnel present and their roles, and all stops and destinations (including 
matters not on the protectee’s official itinerary, such as personal appointments and 
meals).”
49  
The 2021 Report made multiple recordkeeping recommendations, consistent 
with these best practices, including that NYPD “maintain appropriate records 
establishing location and time of each stop when detail resources/personnel are in 
use, such as detailed memo books and car logs, as well as any other duties undertaken 
by EPU members.”
50  NYPD rejected this recommendation.51   
Consistent with NYPD’s refusal to maintain records pursuant to DOI’s 
recommendation, DOI found in this Review that a NYPD security detail did not 
maintain appropriate records of its work.  Members of service assigned to that detail 
confirmed to DOI that they do not maintain trip logs, tour summaries, or other 
records that would establish detail usage, destinations, or other duties undertaken 
by detail members.  The members of service stated that the command log, showing 
when they started and ended their tours, was the only record NYPD maintained in 
connection with their work. 
DOI further found that the NYPD, more broadly, does not adequately maintain 
key written records of security determinations for all elected officials with security 
details.  Security determinations provide a factual basis to support the use of City 
                                            
48 2021 Report at 30-42. 
49 Id. at 9 
50 Id. at 45. 
51 NYPD Resp. at 5.  
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 20  
resources to protect elected officials by establishing the threats they face and how a 
security detail will meet that threat.  A written security determination also provides 
a reference point that can help ensure that protectees receive the appropriate level of 
security based on the threats they face.  A security determination may also support 
the use of a City-funded security detail when an elected official travels out of the City, 
because the COIB has made clear that elected officials for whom the NYPD has “not 
made a determination that the provision of security is required” must presumptively 
reimburse the City for any out-of-City travel using a City-provided vehicle.
52   
NYPD confirmed that written security determinations are not made for certain 
elected officials.  This is inconsistent with the PDGs, however, which specify that 
“discretionary protection” is subject to a determination that “will be memorializ ed 
internally for each request.” 
From the above, it is evident that NYPD has not fully addressed DOI’s 
recommendations for security determinations.  The 2021 Report recommended that 
NYPD create “formal process[es]” for detail eligibility decisions and decl ination of 
protection.53  While the PDGs list the “factors considered” in eligibility decisions, note 
that details can be declined, and state that both determinations and declinations will 
be memorialized, the Guidelines do not provide formal processes or p rocedures for 
eligibility or declination and do not require that they be memorialized in writing.  
Based on DOI’s review it appears that no such determinations are made or 
memorialized for certain categories of elected officials.  Furthermore, NYPD has yet  
to provide guidance on how members of service should make and document security 
determinations, or how a protectee should decline security and document that 
declination.54  
                                            
52 2009-1 at 11.  
53 2021 Report at 44, PPR #2A.  
54 Moreover, DOI has received information from NYPD conflicting with the Guidance, raising questions 
as to whether  NYPD in fact adheres to the Guidance.  In particular, the PDGs state that the Police 
Commissioner has the ultimate decision -making authority for assigning details.  However, NYPD 
informed DOI that security designations are actually made by the Chief of th e Intelligence Bureau, 
not the Police Commissioner.  
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 21  
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
As DOI made clear in the 2021 Report, “[n]o reasonable person disputes” that 
certain elected officials may need security protection from the NYPD, and that 
providing such protection is in the interest of the City where consistent with the law.  
It is therefore also  in the City’s interest to ensure that sec urity provided to elected 
officials is of the highest quality and tailored to the specific threats faced.  And 
recognizing that “the provision of a standing security detail is potentially vulnerable 
to corruption and misuse of public resources,” it is also  in the City’s interest to 
establish “appropriate policies and practices [to] guard against these risks” to aid 
elected officials and the members of service who protect them in complying with the 
law.
55  
For those reasons, DOI made a number of recommendations in the 2021 Report 
encouraging NYPD to implement new policies and practices to improve training and 
reduce corruption risks.   As this Review shows, NYPD has made some progress 
towards implementing DOI’s previous recommendations, but there is still substantial 
room for improvement.   
 DOI found that NYPD’s new written guidance still has substantial gaps, and 
that elected officials and members of service need additional information including 
with respect to the permissible uses of a security detail.  DOI further determined that 
the members of service assigned to security details, and interviewed by DOI in 
connection with this investigation, had limited knowledge of the rules governing the 
use of City resources such as security details, reflecting a need for  additional NYPD 
guidance and training.  DOI further determined that NYPD’s recordkeeping remains 
inadequate, as to documentation of the need for a security detail and the nature of 
the threat at issue, as well as a log of locations visited and activities undertaken by 
the members of details.   
DOI also found that NYPD provided limited training to those members of 
service assigned to security details.  The training should be enhanced with additional 
content on ethics rules and legal guidelines governing sec urity details, and also 
should be given more regularly—some of the officers that DOI interviewed had only 
two to three days of dignitary protection training in a ten -year period (or 
more).  Training must be given more frequently to ensure that officers have the tools 
and knowledge available to provide effective protection to elected officials as well as 
an awareness of activities that fall outside protective detail duties, consistent with 
applicable City laws and ethics rules.  
                                            
55 2021 Report at 42. 
 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 22  
For these reasons, DOI reiter ates its policy and procedure recommendations 
(“PPRs”) from the 2021 Report, and now makes the following additional PPRs:56   
PPR #1: In the 2021 Report, DOI recommended that NYPD implement formal 
processes, including written records, for security detail el igibility 
determinations, declination of protection, and permitted detail usages.  DOI 
acknowledges that NYPD has begun to comply with this recommendation, as 
reflected in the new Guidelines.   However, as discussed, the PDGs have 
substantial gaps.  
DOI rec ommends that NYPD further develop the PDGs to reflect 
current executive protection best practices, based on consultation 
with outside experts, and to address the gaps identified by DOI in this 
report.  At a minimum, the PDGs should include substantive guid ance for 
both members of service and protectees on the proper use of security details, 
reflecting the restrictions imposed by the City’s Conflicts Law on the use of 
City resources.  
PPR #2: The 2021 Report stated that NYPD should “Require and provide high-
quality executive protection training to personnel assigned to the Executive 
Protection Unit[,] . . .  ideally [] provided by experts outside the NYPD who 
have experience with best practices  in establishing clear boundaries and 
navigating the challeng es inherent to the detail -protectee relationship, in 
addition to effective techniques for protection.” 
DOI reiterates that PPR, and now further states that NYPD should 
require and provide such training to all personnel assigned to 
security details of elect ed officials, both within and outside the 
EPU.  In addition to any functional updates ( i.e., developments in protective 
strategies, defensive tactics, etc.), such trainings must address detail 
eligibility, declining protection, proper detail use, and appropriate boundaries 
between detail members and their protectees, reflecting the restrictions 
imposed by the City’s Conflicts of Interests Law on the use of City resources.  
To the extent that members of service have not received such training recently, 
NYPD should ensure that they are provided updated training as soon as 
practicable. 
PPR #3 : The 2021 Report stated that NYPD should “Maintain appropriate 
records establishing location and time of each stop when detail 
                                            
56 DOI reiterates all of the PPRs from the 2021 Report in full for the reasons provided therein, 
including those rejected by the NYPD. DOI further extends its new and prior PPRs to all NYPD 
bureaus, units, and members of service that provide dignitary protec tion ( i.e., TAPU, EPU, UOU, 
Detectives’ Bureau, and any others that provide dignitary protection).  
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 23  
resources/personnel are in use, such as deta iled memo books and car logs, as 
well as any other duties undertaken by EPU members.”   
DOI reiterates its prior recommendation, and furthermore 
recommends that NYPD maintain appropriate records for all security 
details, whether managed by EPU or otherwise, establishing location 
and time of each stop when detail resources and/or personnel are in 
use, such as detailed memo books and car logs, as well as any other 
duties undertaken by detail members. 
PPR #4: NYPD should promptly conduct a review to identify whether 
it has made written security determinations for all elected officials 
currently assigned security details.  To the extent that such security 
determinations were not memorialized in writing or cannot be located, NYPD 
should promptly make such determi nations (following a formal analysis 
consistent with this and the 2021 Report) and adjust assignments based on 
said process, if necessary. 
PPR #5 : NYPD should regularly update its written security 
determinations for elected officials and adjust security de tails as 
necessary to reflect changes in identified threats (as determined by 
threat analyses), in light of the need to use limited government 
resources efficiently.  
DOI provided NYPD with a copy of this report for its comments.  In response, 
NYPD did not comment as to three of the five PPRs issued.
57   
NYPD did respond to PPR #2 and PPR #3.  Concerning PPR #2, where DOI 
recommended that NYPD require and provide high -quality executive protection 
training to all members of service assigned to security details, NYPD stated:  
[T]he Department is unable to fully implement the PPR as written. While 
Department personnel assigned to the Executive Protection Unit (“EPU”) 
may receive training from the Secret Service, the number of training slots 
available to the Department is determi ned by the Secret Service. 
Accordingly, the Department does not have the ability to provide that 
training to all members of service assigned to security details, whether 
they are assigned to EPU or otherwise. However, to the extent that the 
Intelligence Division provides training to its EPU personnel, the NYPD 
is open to extending that training to all members of service assigned to 
security details, including those outside of EPU. Moreover, the training 
                                            
57 NYPD Draft Comments. 
 
Investigation Concerning New York City Police Department  
Security Details for City Elected Officials January 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 24  
provided to EPU can be reviewed and amended, as necess ary, to ensure 
that the NYC Conflict of Interest Laws are fully addressed.58 
DOI acknowledges the limitations that NYPD faces in obtaining training from 
outside sources, and understands that it may not be possible to provide such training 
to all members of service.  NYPD’s stated plan to extend its EPU training to all 
members of service assigned to security details would satisfy PPR #2 as long as that 
training incorporates both the functional updates and legal restrictions identified in 
that PPR.  
NYPD rejected PPR #3, which recommends NYPD maintain appropriate 
records for all security details.  NYPD stated to DOI that:  
As to PPR #3, the Department believes that serious security risks exist in 
maintaining such records. If made public, such documentation coul d 
demonstrate habitual movements of protectees and could put a protectee’s 
safety at risk. The Department reiterates that its current system tracks 
which personnel are working on specific dates, and with whom they are 
working.
59 
As noted, NYPD’s refusal to maintain such records is a substantial deviation 
from best practices established by other protective agencies, including the Secret 
Service, Diplomatic Security Service, and U.S. Marshals, which all do so.  Moreover, 
PPR #3 does not require NYPD to maintai n public records of security detail 
operations.  As with many categories of records maintained by NYPD and other law 
enforcement agencies, any such records would necessarily be confidential in nature.  
For those reasons, NYPD has not articulated a reasonable basis to reject PPR #3, and 
DOI reiterates that NYPD should implement it in full so as to align with existing best 
practices.  
 
 
                                            
58 Id. at 1.  
59 Id. 