OCTOBER 2023DECEMBER 2025
CREATIVE  NEW YORK
The creative sector—from performing arts  
organizations to design firms—is more critical than 
ever to New York City’s economy. But mounting 
affordability challenges threaten its future.
Creative New York 2025 is a publication of the 
Center for an Urban Future. Researched and 
written by Eli Dvorkin, Rachel Neches, Sophia 
Tumolo, Andrew Bauld, Olivia Bensimon, and 
Hannah Berman. Edited by Eli Dvorkin, Jonathan 
Bowles, and Dorian Block. Additional research  
by Nicholas Caruso, Madison Cheng, Udonne 
Eke-Okoro, Dare Fitzpatrick, Zamira Frost,  
Lina Mazioui, Ralph Osias, Makenzie Rodrigues, 
Jay Siegel, and Samuel Weidman. Designed by 
Stislow Design.
Center for an Urban Future (CUF) is a leading 
think tank focused on building a stronger  
and more equitable economy in New York City, 
and expanding economic opportunity for all 
New Yorkers.
This report was made possible thanks  
to support from Rockefeller Brothers Fund,  
Howard Gilman Foundation,  
Ford Foundation, and Mellon Foundation.
Any opinions, findings, or recommendations 
expressed in this report are those of the  
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views 
of our funders.
General operating support for the Center for an 
Urban Future has been provided by The Clark 
Foundation and the Altman Foundation.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Jonathan Bowles
EDITORIAL & POLICY DIRECTOR
Eli Dvorkin
CHIEF OF STAFF
Stephanie Arevalo
SENIOR EDITOR 
Dorian Block
SENIOR DATA & POLICY RESEARCHER
Rachel Neches 
SENIOR FELLOW FOR CLIMATE & OPPORTUNITY
John Surico 
RESEARCH AND OPERATIONS ASSOCIATE
Sophia Tumolo 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Gifford Miller (Chairman)
Margaret Anadu 
Jonathan Bowles 
Rafael E. Cestero 
Russell Dubner 
Garnesha Ezediaro 
Susan Fine 
Kyle Kimball 
Katy Knight 
Jessie Lazarus 
David Lebenstein 
Eric S. Lee 
Josh Moskowitz 
Monisha Nariani 
Max Neukirchen 
Andrew Reicher 
Peter Schubert 
John Siegal 
Thomas Vecchione 
Sherry Wang 
Kate Wittels
Cover Photo: Ricardo Gomez Angel
Rockefeller Brothers Fund | Visual Identity Guidelines| Revised November 2019 4
Correct Logo Use
Philanthropy for an Interdependent World
Rockefeller
Brothers Fund
3-Color Reverse
1-Color Positive
Minimum Size with Tagline Minimum Size with No Tagline
1-Color Reverse
at least 1 1/2” wide 1 1/4” wide
The	logotype	and	tagline	must	always	be	legible.	The	minimum	size	for	the	primary	signature	is	
1.5”	wide.	For	smaller	placements,	use	the	no	tagline	signature.	The	logo	should	never	appear	in	
any	signature	at	a	width	less	than	1.25”.
On	the	web,	the	minimum	size	for	the	logo	is	180px	wide.	For	mobile	and	tablet	views,	use	the	
no tagline signature. 
3-Color Positive
Access RBF logos here: https://rockefellerbrothersfund.box.com/v/grantee-comms 
Creative New York
Introduction: New York’s Creative Economy at a Crossroads . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Section 2: The Impact of the Arts on New York City’s Economic Future....  11
Section 3: The Vital Role of the Arts in Times of Crisis ..................  18
Section 4: Key Challenges Facing the Arts ............................  24
Section 5: Key Challenges Facing the Creative Industries ...............  32
Section 6: The Impact of AI on NYC’s Artists and Creative Economy.......  33
Section 7: Creating a More Inclusive Creative Economy and Arts Sector ...  35
Section 8: Progress in New York City Arts and Culture Policy 
(2015–2025)  ....................................................  38
Section 9: Beyond the Department for Cultural Affairs (DCLA):  
Cross-Agency Opportunities to Support the Arts  .......................  40
Section 10: Policy Recommendations  ...............................  43
Table of Contents
1
CREATIVE NEW YORK 20251
Creative New York
1
FROM BROADWAY THEATERS TO BUSHWICK STUDIOS, BRONX REHEARSAL SPACES TO QUEENS SOUND STAGES,  
the creative sector remains one of New York City’s greatest economic engines and competitive advantages. The 
arts and creative industries employ more than 326,000 New Yorkers, attract millions of visitors each year, power 
the city’s global brand, and arguably serve as the city’s most important talent magnet in a talent-driven economy. 
But after decades of steady growth in almost every part of the city’s creative economy, this vital engine is now 
sputtering. Since the start of the pandemic, the city has seen an 18.8 percent decline in dancers, an 8 percent 
drop in actors, and a 2.8 percent decrease in musicians. But it’s no longer just artists whose numbers are  
dwindling: fashion designers are down 25.9 percent, film and video editors 18.5 percent, graphic designers 
13.8 percent, and art directors 6 percent.1 
Meanwhile, creative industries that had been among the city’s fastest growing sectors in the decade before 
the pandemic are now lagging well behind. Between 2005 and 2020, employment in the city’s film and television 
sector increased by 113.7 percent. But since 2020, film and TV jobs in New York City are down by 19.1 percent. 
There has been a similar pre-and-post pandemic employment divergence in advertising (up 46.1 percent from 
2005 to 2020, and down 15.7 percent since), architecture (+ 61.1 percent vs -9.4 percent), applied design 
(+12.5 percent vs -14.3 percent), performing arts (+30.2 percent vs -6.4 percent), and visual arts (+95.7 percent 
vs -1.3 percent). 
The overall number of people working in the city’s creative economy—including jobs and self-employment in 
more than a dozen cultural and creative industries, as well as creative jobs in fields outside the creative economy— 
has declined by 6.1 percent since 2019. 
The city is also beginning to lose market share. New York City’s share of all people working nationwide in the 
creative economy has declined from 9.3 percent to 8.6 percent since 2019. There have been particularly worrisome 
declines in the city’s share of national employment in advertising (from 11.7 percent of the nation’s jobs in 2019 
to 10.7 in 2024), performing arts (11.5 percent to 10.7 percent), applied design (6.3 percent to 5.4 percent), film 
and television (15.5 percent to 14.9 percent) and music production (10.8 percent to 10.2 percent). 
Behind the numbers, the city’s arts and culture ecosystem has sustained difficult losses.2 Many nonprofit arts 
organizations say they are more financially vulnerable than ever. And across the cultural landscape, venues are 
vanishing: Nearly 50 theaters, music clubs, museums, and galleries have shuttered since 2020, many pointing to 
lasting changes in audience behavior, soaring insurance costs, and other unsustainable operating pressures.
The causes run deeper than the pandemic. New York’s broader affordability crisis—already pushing out 
thousands of working- and middle-class residents—is hitting the creative sector especially hard. While artists 
have long struggled to afford life in New York, today those pressures extend across the entire creative economy, 
squeezing professionals in fields like advertising, design, and fashion. Creative workers in New York now earn 
about 23 percent less than the national average after adjusting for the city’s high cost of living, down from 15 
percent less a decade ago, while housing and studio rents continue to climb.
Nonprofit and commercial venues alike face rising expenses on every front—from labor and materials to 
insurance, which for many organizations has multiplied several-fold since 2020. While costs are up, many 
performing arts venues have seen notable declines in revenues from ticket sales, driven by major audience 
shifts since the pandemic—with people opting for in-home streaming over in-person attendance. At the same 
time, creative employment is shifting toward freelance and contract work: self-employment in creative industries 
has grown 10.3 percent since 2019, and the number of independent artists, writers, and performers is up 
65.6 percent over the past decade, creating greater economic insecurity. Meanwhile, artists of color earn about 
2
37 percent less than white artists, underscoring how 
existing inequities make the affordability crisis even 
more acute.3
Yet this is not a story of decline alone. Across the 
five boroughs, nightlife remains remarkably vibrant, 
museums are expanding, and new cultural spaces are 
taking root—from the Bronx Music Hall and ArtBuilt in 
Brooklyn to the reopening of the Studio Museum in 
Harlem. Over the past few years, New York City has 
made record investments in arts and culture, including 
the largest-ever budget for the Department of Cultural 
Affairs (DCLA) and new permanent baseline funding. 
The city has expanded the Cultural Institutions Group 
and launched initiatives like the City Artist Corps to 
support working artists. 
But sustaining this progress will require going  
further. Even with public cultural funding at record 
highs, city leaders have done too little to tackle the 
structural pressures undermining the creative sector— 
especially the affordability crisis that is pushing  
artists and creative professionals out of New York.  
Today, the forces reshaping the creative sector extend 
well beyond arts funding. Housing and studio costs, 
insurance, the insecurity of freelance work, and the 
rise of AI demand a broader, cross-agency strategy—
or New York risks losing the creative core that fuels its 
economy and identity.
The next administration will need to act boldly: 
dramatically expanding affordable artist housing and 
workspaces; stabilizing small venues by addressing 
skyrocketing operating costs; piloting portable bene -
fits for freelancers; launching the city’s first annual 
five-borough cultural festival; and mobilizing agen -
cies from housing, transportation, and parks to the 
Economic Development Corporation to fully integrate 
creativity into the city’s economic and civic agenda.
New York City’s resident artist population falls in recent years 
From 2004 to 2019, the city’s resident artist population grew 34.7 percent,  
but has since declined by 4.4 percent
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from Lightcast. Created with Datawrapper

3
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
Two decades ago, the Center for an Urban Future 
published Creative New York, the first comprehensive 
report documenting the immense and growing  
economic and cultural impact of New York City’s  
artists, cultural organizations, and for-profit creative 
industries. This third landmark edition of Creative New 
York finds a vital sector at a defining crossroads: its 
importance to the city’s economy and civic life has 
never been greater, yet an intensifying affordability  
crisis has led to stagnant job growth, an exodus of  
artists, and a mounting challenge for the city’s next 
generation of leaders.
This report—supported by grants from the  
Rockefeller Brothers Fund, Howard Gilman Founda -
tion, Ford Foundation, and Mellon Foundation—draws 
on more than 120 interviews with artists, cultural 
leaders, creative entrepreneurs, community-based 
organizations, business leaders, and policymakers 
across the five boroughs, as well as extensive analysis 
of employment, wage, and industry data from the 
U.S. Census Bureau, Bureau of Labor Statistics, New 
York State Department of Labor, Lightcast, and city, 
state, and federal budget documents.
Although much of this report details new challenges 
and threats facing artists, arts organizations, and  
creative industries, the central finding is a positive 
one: New York City boasts more cultural and creative 
jobs than any city in the United States, and this part of 
the economy—while often underappreciated—is more 
critical than ever to the city’s economic future. Overall, 
New York City’s broader creative sector—which we  
define to include 10 key industries: advertising, film 
and television, broadcasting and media streaming, 
publishing, architecture, design, music, visual arts, 
performing arts, and independent artists—employed 
326,093 people in 2024 (including jobs in creative 
industries, creative jobs across the economy, and 
self-employment). That’s 6.1 percent below its 2019 
peak, but up a remarkable 24.6 percent since 2004 
and 3.5 percent since 2014.
The creative sector also provides New York with 
what is arguably its greatest competitive advantage. 
The city is home to 16.8 percent of the nation’s fashion 
designers, 15 percent of all producers and directors, 
and 12.2 percent of editors—far more than any  
other metro area. New York is home to more than 10  
percent of national employment in film and television 
NYC has lost resident artists and creatives since 2019
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from Lightcast. Created with Datawrapper

4
Nearly all of New York City's creative industries have not recovered to pre-pandemic levels 
Change in jobs, 2019-2024
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from Lightcast. Created with Datawrapper
NYC's slipping share of national creative employment
The city's share of national creative jobs has slipped in seven out of ten industries
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from Lightcast. Created with Datawrapper
New York is losing ground among creative occupations
NYC's share of the nation's artists is declining across most fields — these fields saw the largest losses.
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from Lightcast. Created with Datawrapper

5
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
(14.9 percent), publishing (14.4 percent), broadcasting 
(12.7 percent), performing arts (10.7 percent),  
advertising (10.7 percent), and music production 
(10.2 percent). At the same time, creative nonprofits 
and businesses continue to put down roots here:  
creative firms accounted for 6.9 percent of all net new 
businesses formed over the past decade—more than 
in healthcare or education, and behind only technology 
and restaurants. The number of cultural nonprofits 
has also risen 32.1 percent since 2014, including an 
18.9 percent increase since the pandemic, reaching a 
record 5,523 organizations.4 And New York is leading 
the globe in the emerging creator economy: the five  
boroughs are home to seven of the top 25 creators on 
Rolling Stone’s 2025 list—more than any other city.
The city’s unmatched cultural and creative  
ecosystem—powered by world-class institutions and 
thousands of small and mid-sized nonprofits with no 
parallel elsewhere—also anchors an immense tourism 
economy and serves as one of the most important 
draws for the talent that fuels industries from finance 
to tech. Indeed, the city’s unmatched creative edge 
may be the single most important asset that helps 
New York counteract the many negatives of living here, 
including the city’s astronomical cost of living. 
But unlike in previous decades, New York is  
now losing share to cities across the country. Other 
regions—including many with significantly lower costs 
of living—have seen their creative workforces flourish 
since 2019, Nashville (+17.4 percent), Dallas (+14.3 
percent), and Miami (+12.3 percent). 5 Although New 
York City’s creative workforce is still larger than the 
combined totals for the Chicago, San Francisco, and 
Atlanta metro areas, the city’s share of national  
creative jobs has slipped in seven out of ten industries, 
including film and television, advertising, music pro -
duction, performing arts, and applied design.
Likewise, artists are relocating in record numbers 
to more affordable cities and towns, while arts organi-
zations—large and small alike—find themselves on  
increasingly shaky financial ground. These losses are 
reverberating across the city. And while New York  
remains the nation’s undisputed cultural capital, its 
creative foundation has rarely felt more fragile.
Or as Powerhouse Arts CEO Eric Shiner puts it, “If 
artists and creatives and actors and everyone else 
can’t afford to live here anymore, then the magic dies.” 
The pandemic drove artists out—  
affordability is keeping them away
Affording life in New York has never been easy for  
artists. But since the pandemic, something funda -
mental has shifted. Work dried up, costs soared, and 
incomes failed to keep pace—pushing many artists 
past the breaking point and extending those same 
pressures across the broader creative economy.  
Now, the affordability crisis that once hit hardest for  
early-career strivers is squeezing established artists 
and creative professionals alike. The result is visible 
across nearly every discipline, from dance and theater 
to design, film, and the visual arts: artists left during 
the pandemic, and many haven’t come back.
“We all know tons of artists that have moved  
upstate, moved out of the city, and don’t really have 
plans to come back,” says Lisa Gold, executive director 
of the Asian American Arts Alliance. “And it’s not just 
the artists—it’s the art handlers, the curators, the  
preparators. It’s a whole economy.”
Artist Kahlil Robert Irving, known for his tactile, 
immersive sculptures and installations, had gained 
national recognition through exhibitions at the Walker 
Art Center and the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA). 
Yet by 2020, New York City had grown increasingly 
inhospitable, despite his rising success.
“Trying to survive and sustain in New York, the hustle 
gets complicated,” Irving says. “How much of yourself 
may you have to lose just to continue to participate?”
Ultimately, Irving chose to return to St. Louis, 
where his family lives. Freed from New York’s crushing 
costs, he was able to purchase a 13,000-square-foot 
warehouse studio—space and tools he could never 
have afforded in the city.
Irving is just one of thousands of artists who left 
New York since 2020 and have not returned. South 
Korea–born painter GaHee Park moved to Montreal  
in late 2020, citing diminished cultural vibrancy, the 
burden of renewing artist visas, and the appeal of more 
affordable studio and living space. Gregory Dolbashian, 
a New York–born dancer and choreographer, relocated 
his company, Dash Ensemble, to Dallas that same 
year, where he now runs a training program for young 
dancers. Even acclaimed novelist Zadie Smith left 
New York after more than a decade, returning to London 
in 2020.
6
Many assume New York has been losing artists 
and creatives for decades, but resident worker data 
reveals the real decline began only in the past five 
years. Between 2004 and 2019, the city’s resident 
artist population increased by 34.7 percent—from 
92,383 in 2004 to 111,760 in 2014 and 124,484 in 
2019. But from 2019 to 2024, the city’s artist popula-
tion has declined by 4.4 percent (to 118,959). 
The pre- and post-pandemic shifts are even starker 
in several creative professions. The number of fashion 
designers living in the city rose 38.4 percent from 
2004 to 2019, but has since fallen 25.9 percent.  
Architects increased by 13.9 percent over the same 
fifteen-year span, but declined 4.6 percent from 2019 
to 2024. The city’s editor population grew 41.6 per -
cent from 2004 to 2019, then dropped 13.2 percent; 
and the number of art directors rose 28.8 percent  
before 2019 but has since fallen 6 percent.
Organizations are shedding jobs  
or simply shutting down 
Since 2020, arts organizations across the city have 
closed their doors or scaled back operations, shedding 
jobs and audiences in the process. These closures are 
stark warnings that business and funding models 
which sustained the arts for decades are faltering in a 
post-pandemic world.
CUF’s research identified more than two dozen 
galleries that have shuttered in just the past two years, 
from stalwarts like Cheim & Read, Betty Cunningham, 
Jack Hanley Gallery, and Mitchell-Innes & Nash to 
younger spaces that championed emerging artists,  
including Deli Gallery, Fortnight Institute, Queer 
Thoughts, and DorDor.
Rising rents and uneven sales play a role, but  
gallerists also cite a deeper shift: the growing  
dominance of online sales and a diminishing need for 
physical space—changes with profound consequences 
for New York’s creative ecosystem. “The pandemic hit 
a lot of small- to medium-sized galleries, and the after-
effects hit even more,” says Eric Shiner of Powerhouse 
Arts. “So, a lot of smaller galleries are closing.”
It’s not just galleries. Small museums are buckling 
under economic pressures: Chelsea’s Rubin Museum 
of Art and SoHo’s Center for Italian Modern Art both 
closed in 2024, while museum employment overall  
is down 8.6 percent since 2019. Major institutions  
including The Guggenheim Museum and the Brooklyn 
Museum, have announced layoffs.6
Presenting organizations located in lower-income 
communities faced especially steep challenges during 
the pandemic. Fully 25 percent of arts groups in low -
er-income zip codes reported losing their sole physical 
space during the pandemic, compared to under 12 
percent of organizations located in other areas.
Other pillars of New York City’s cultural infrastructure 
are beginning to fall as well. More than 20 music,  
performance, and nightlife venues have shuttered 
since the pandemic—including jazz clubs like Jazz 
Standard and 55 Bar, legendary drag venue Pyramid 
Club, and theaters such as The Secret Theatre and 
Playhouse 46. 
Creative industry employment  
has declined since 2019
It’s not just nonprofit arts venues and institutions that 
are struggling. The fortunes of the city’s for-profit cre-
ative industries have taken a U-turn since the pandemic. 
One key finding from the previous edition of  
Creative New York (2015) was that “several creative 
industries have been among the fastest growing seg -
ments of the city’s economy.” Indeed, employment in 
six different key creative industries outpaced the city’s 
12 percent overall employment growth over the  
decade leading up to 2015—including film and televi -
sion (growing by 53 percent over the prior decade), 
architecture (up by 33 percent), performing arts  
(26 percent), advertising (24 percent), visual arts (24 
percent), and applied design (17 percent). 
Most of these creative industries continued to add 
jobs at a brisk pace until 2020. But while the pandemic 
induced significant job losses in virtually every sector, 
employment in many creative industries has remained 
below pre-pandemic totals even as the city’s overall 
economy has more than recovered. From the first 
quarter of 2020 to the first quarter of 2025, total city 
employment is up 4.6 percent but down notably in film 
and TV (-19.1 percent), advertising (-15.7 percent), 
applied design (-14.3 percent), publishing (-11.7  
percent), architecture (-9.4 percent), performing arts 
(-6.4 percent), music production (-3 percent), and  
visual arts (-1.3 percent). 
7
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
These losses threaten what had been an encour -
aging development in the city’s economy: the emergence 
of a reliable new source of middle-class jobs. Behind 
the decline are major changes in how creative work is 
made and where it happens. The pandemic upended 
production models and accelerated a shift toward  
flexible, remote, and contract-based employment. As 
companies adapted to hybrid operations, many  
replaced full-time roles with freelance and project-based 
work. By 2025, just 45 percent of media workers  
report being in the office every day—the lowest share 
of any major industry. At the same time, companies 
have increasingly realized they can hire talent in other 
creative hubs—from Denver to Atlanta, and in cities 
around the world—where workers can plug into distrib-
uted teams and earn a good living at a fraction of a 
New York salary.
“It’s about how hard it is for young people in New 
York to live on salaries they earn in a lot of creative 
businesses,” says Andrew Robertson, chairman of 
BBDO Worldwide, a global creative agency headquar -
tered in New York City. “These are cool jobs, but they 
don’t get paid a lot. At the same time, other cities are 
opening up as creative centers. If you were going into 
advertising ten years ago, you were going to New York, 
Chicago, Los Angeles, or San Francisco. That was kind 
of it. Now, you have the option of getting a good job in 
a decent agency in Atlanta, Austin, and other places. 
That’s a seismic shift that wasn’t there 10 years ago.”
It’s no coincidence that one of the only creative 
industries to grow since 2019 is independent artists, 
up 22.6 percent. That growth reflects the rise of free -
lance and self-employed creative workers—a shift that 
has brought greater flexibility but also deepened chal-
lenges around financial stability, health insurance, 
and other essential benefits.
Meanwhile, rising costs in New York are colliding 
with growing competition elsewhere. Cities like Atlanta, 
as well as international hubs such as London and  
Budapest, have become increasingly attractive for film 
and television production, offering lower costs, robust 
local talent, and strong public incentives. As New York’s 
affordability crisis worsens, more creative workers 
and companies are choosing to build careers and 
businesses elsewhere, or shift more of their buying 
and spending to other places.
New York’s arts ecosystem faces 
new and growing threats
New York’s arts ecosystem is inseparable from the 
city’s identity and essential to its civic life. It animates 
neighborhoods, brings people together across lines of 
difference, and strengthens local economies—from 
filling restaurants and hotels to supporting thousands 
of small creative businesses in every borough. But  
after years of mounting costs, uneven audiences,  
and intensifying competition, this ecosystem is under 
serious strain. Without new solutions, these challenges 
will erode not just the city’s cultural vitality but a key 
pillar of its civic and economic resilience.
The affordability crisis for artists  
has reached a breaking point.
New York’s affordability crisis has reached a breaking 
point for the city’s creative workforce. Even though 
creative economy workers here earn higher nominal 
wages than their peers elsewhere, after adjusting for 
the cost of living they earn about 22.6 percent less 
than the national average—a gap that has widened 
from 15 percent a decade ago. 7 Meanwhile, asking 
rents have surged nearly 40 percent across Brooklyn, 
Queens, and the Bronx since 2019—forcing many  
artists to choose between housing and studio space.8 
To afford market rents in the Bronx, residents would 
need to earn more than $120,000 a year, more than 
double the typical artist’s income.
Neighborhoods that long anchored the city’s  
creative life are now losing artists at alarming rates. 
Since 2018, the artist population has fallen 5 percent 
in Bushwick, 17 percent in Harlem, and 18 percent in 
Chelsea and Hell’s Kitchen, as median asking rents 
have jumped more than 30 percent.9 Some neighbor-
hoods have seen even steeper declines over the past 
decade: the artist population on the Upper West Side 
has fallen by nearly one-third, and on the Lower East 
Side it has plunged 55 percent while rents rose 46 
percent. Meanwhile, over the past decade, U.S. cities 
have created more than 2,800 units of dedicated  
artist housing—with another 1,200 approved or under 
construction—and not a single one is in New York City.
At the same time, cities like Austin, Nashville, and 
Atlanta now offer something new: real opportunities in 
thriving creative sectors, paired with far lower costs of 
living. For many artists and creative professionals, 
8
Creatives shift towards freelance work
While workers employed in businesses in creative industries decline post-pandemic, 
self-employment and independent artists surge
 
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from Lightcast. Created with Datawrapper
Adjusted for NYC's high costs, creative workers earn less than the U.S. median
Creative workers in New York now earn 23 percent less than the national hourly  
median wage, down from 15 percent less a decade ago
 
 
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from Lightcast. The figures above represent the weighted average of median 
hourly wages of creative occupations. This calculation was based on Brooklyn's cost of living. Created with Datawrapper

9
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
that combination has become impossible to ignore—
and New York is feeling the consequences. “We need 
New York to be a place that people want to come and 
build,” says Ben Lerer, managing partner of VC firm 
Lerer Hippeau. “The pain of living in New York needs to 
be outweighed by the value of community and the  
cultural richness of living here. It’s about safety and 
affordability, but also keeping the city interesting, fun, 
and cool, where diversity is celebrated.”
Audience habits have changed, and  
the pandemic recovery remains uneven.
Even before COVID-19, streaming and shifting leisure 
habits were reshaping how New Yorkers engage with 
culture. The pandemic dramatically accelerated those 
changes—and five years later, many organizations are 
still feeling the effects. Broadway attendance has  
returned roughly to pre-pandemic levels, but other  
institutions continue to face volatility. The Guggenheim 
Museum welcomed 766,000 visitors in 2024—down 
one-third from 2019. And while the 39 members of 
the city’s Cultural Institutions Group saw record atten-
dance in FY2024, overall visits still fell 9 percent  
last year, reflecting the broader instability that many 
organizations are experiencing.
At the same time, high ticket prices—often neces -
sary to offset rising production and operating costs—
are straining audiences as New Yorkers grapple  
with day-to-day affordability challenges. It’s not just  
Broadway or Madison Square Garden: at small venues 
in Bushwick or Greenpoint, a ticket to see a new band 
that cost $15 before the pandemic might now be $35, 
and an intimate off-Broadway performance can easily 
top $100. For many residents, live performance has 
shifted from a regular part of city life to an occasional 
luxury—with significant consequences for venues and 
presenting organizations of all sizes.
Costs for venues and organizations have  
gone through the roof—led by insurance.
It has always been hard to survive as an arts and  
culture organization in New York City, but today the 
costs of staying open are spiraling out of control. From 
insurance and wages to rent and utilities, expenses 
have surged since the pandemic. “New York is just  
so freaking expensive,” says Sade Lythcott, CEO of  
the National Black Theatre. “It’s more expensive to  
produce shows. It’s more expensive to retain staff. 
And the city in general—with inflation and cost of living 
increases across the board—is more expensive to live in.”
Insurance premiums, in particular, have become 
punishing. At Barbès, the beloved Brooklyn music  
venue, annual insurance costs have jumped from 
$4,000 to $22,000 over the past decade. Others have 
faced even steeper hikes: TBA Brooklyn, a now-closed 
Williamsburg club, saw its premiums soar from 
$25,000 to $125,000 before shutting its doors. 10 
New York’s high cost of insurance is driven in part by 
the city’s unusually high volume of lawsuits and liability 
claims. The Partnership for New York City reports that 
premiums here average about 15 percent higher than 
the national rate, with liability claim costs more than 
six times the U.S. average. Survey data shows that  
insurance has become the second-biggest cost  
concern for bars and restaurants—just behind labor—  
a challenge all too familiar to nightlife venues, concert 
halls, and other performance spaces.
Funding isn’t keeping up—and too often,  
it’s not arriving on time.
While costs are rising and revenues are down, public 
and philanthropic funding has not kept pace. The New 
York State Council on the Arts’ FY2025 budget for 
general operating grants—the most flexible and vital 
form of aid—is about $87 million, up from 2019 but 
still down 35.9 percent from its 1990 peak after  
adjusting for inflation. At the same time, New York City 
is home to a record 5,523 cultural nonprofits—up  
32 percent over the past decade—meaning far more 
organizations are competing for a relatively flat pool of 
public and private dollars.
While the Department of Cultural Affairs has 
achieved historic gains, including a record $246.5  
million in support for arts organizations and a perma -
nent baseline increase, it still accounts for less than 
one-quarter of one percent of the city’s budget and 
cannot alone address the structural challenges  
reshaping the sector. Federal support is also eroding. 
The National Endowment for the Arts awarded $15.7 
million to 446 New York City groups in 2024, but many 
have since lost funding as the Trump administration 
moves to dismantle arts and culture programs—  
continuing a 48.4 percent decline in federal arts  
funding to the region over the past 15 years.
Meanwhile, philanthropic priorities are shifting as 
major foundations redirect resources toward social 
10
services and shoring up the safety net in response to 
federal cuts. This shift has left the arts especially  
vulnerable—once again struggling to be seen as  
essential to the city’s well-being, even though the  
pandemic proved how vital culture is to recovery and 
resilience. “We are starting to see the erosion of foun-
dation funding available to the arts, more drastically  
in the last two years,” says Lucy Sexton, executive  
director of New Yorkers for Culture and Arts.
Compounding these challenges, many arts non -
profits simply aren’t getting paid on time. While late 
payments to human services organizations have drawn 
long-overdue attention, arts organizations face the 
same problem—often with even less visibility. The  
city comptroller reports at least $1 billion in unpaid 
invoices across human services agencies, but that  
figure excludes the Department of Education, where 
many arts groups experience some of the longest  
delays, as well as the Department of Cultural Affairs, 
whose contracts are not included in those tallies. 11 
When payments are held up, smaller organizations 
that depend on city contracts are forced to take on 
debt, cut staff, or scale back programs just to stay 
open. “It’s really devastating to smaller groups,” says 
Risa Shoup, co–executive director of the Alliance of 
Resident Theatres/New York. “They rely disproportion-
ately on public funding because they don’t meet the 
threshold for private philanthropic support—and they 
need those contracts to come through quickly.”
Federal threats and culture-war politics are 
adding new uncertainty. 
After weathering the pandemic, New York’s arts and 
creative sector now faces new threats from Washington. 
The Trump administration has begun slashing federal 
funding for arts and culture, putting at risk a vital 
source of support for hundreds of city institutions. The 
National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) has already 
pulled grants from organizations including the Classical 
Theatre of Harlem ($60,000) and the Trisha Brown 
Dance Company ($40,000).12 These cuts are the latest 
in a decade-long decline in federal arts funding, and 
the entire NEA budget is now under threat.
At the same time, a new federal policy requiring 
NEA applicants to be reviewed for compliance with the 
president’s executive order on so-called “gender ideology” 
poses specific risks for LGBTQ+ arts organizations  
and raises broader concerns about free speech and 
artistic expression (though a recent federal court ruling 
found the restriction unconstitutional, a decision the 
government could still appeal). At the same time, a new 
federal policy requiring NEA applicants to be reviewed 
for compliance with the president’s executive order on 
so-called “gender ideology” poses specific risks for 
LGBTQ+ arts organizations and raises broader concerns 
about free speech and artistic expression. And the  
impact extends beyond funding: federal actions have 
dampened international tourism, including a sharp drop 
in visitors from Canada—one of New York’s largest 
tourist markets—and made it harder for foreign artists 
to secure visas or feel safe traveling to the U.S. 13  
Together, these developments threaten not only  
the city’s arts institutions but the broader creative 
economy that depends on cultural exchange and  
global engagement.
New York City’s creative industries 
are also at risk 
New York’s for-profit creative sectors—film and televi-
sion, advertising, design, fashion, architecture, and 
more—have been hit hard by pandemic-era disruptions 
and are now grappling with deeper structural shifts. 
While jobs have partly rebounded, many industries  
remain under severe strain as costs rise, technologies 
evolve, and competition intensifies.
Rising costs are squeezing firms at every level—
but the biggest pressure point is people. 
The cost of hiring and retaining creative talent has 
soared as rents, childcare, and everyday expenses 
make it harder for workers to stay in New York, even 
on solid salaries. Employers say they are losing mid-ca-
reer staff to more affordable markets, from Atlanta 
and Denver to Philadelphia and Austin, while rising 
compensation expectations make it difficult to expand 
payrolls or invest in new projects. Facing both higher 
labor costs and clients demanding leaner budgets, 
many firms are rethinking where they hire—and where 
they grow.
Technological change is  
transforming the landscape. 
Automation and AI tools are upending traditional  
creative roles, particularly in advertising and design, 
11
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
where influencer-driven content and algorithmic 
branding have replaced many labor-intensive campaigns. 
Streaming has also reshaped film and television,  
reducing the number of large-scale productions that 
once anchored local crews.
Global and domestic competition is intensifying. 
Cities like Atlanta, Austin, and Los Angeles are investing 
heavily in creative infrastructure, offering tax incen -
tives and lower costs to lure production. Internationally, 
Seoul, Shanghai, and Copenhagen have emerged as 
new fashion powerhouses, while Toronto, Vancouver, 
Budapest, and Prague are booming as production hubs. 
New York’s creative dominance is no longer guaranteed.
Nowhere are the stakes higher than  
in the rise of artificial intelligence. 
No city is more exposed to AI’s impact on creative 
work than New York, home to both the nation’s largest 
concentration of artists and a rapidly growing AI sector. 
Generative AI is cutting costs but also threatening jobs 
as companies automate tasks once handled by writers, 
designers, and musicians. Yet it is also fueling new 
creative frontiers—from Marc da Costa’s interactive  
installation The Golden Key at the Brooklyn Academy 
of Music (BAM) to Eunsu Kang’s AI-driven visual  
experiments and exhibitions at the Museum of  
Modern Art (MoMA), the Guggenheim, and the Whitney 
Museum of American Art. The challenge for New York is 
to ensure that these breakthroughs spark new creative 
possibilities rather than hollow out the city’s creative 
middle class. 
Renewing New York City’s  
creative spark
New York’s creative sector stands at a crossroads. 
Without bold, coordinated action, the city risks losing 
the artists, organizations, and creative businesses 
that help power its economy and define its identity.
To realize this vision, city and state policymakers 
will need to go further—integrating the arts into eco -
nomic development, transportation, and public space 
initiatives. That means expanding creative placemaking 
through New York City Department of Transportation 
(NYC DOT) plazas, growing public art partnerships with 
Parks, ensuring affordable arts spaces through New 
York City Economic Development Corporation (NYCEDC) 
projects, resourcing the promising Create in Place  
program, and fully implementing the city’s Percent for 
Art law across its vast capital program.
This report lays out a series of recommendations 
to help artists not just survive but thrive in New York 
City over the next decade. To do so, city government 
should invest in and build deeply needed housing to 
improve overall affordability, while integrating an artist 
preference into affordable housing programs. It should 
partner with nonprofits to raise wages for arts workers, 
expand access to health coverage, and pilot portable 
benefits for freelancers and independent artists.  
At the same time, the city should launch a pooled  
insurance program to help small cultural venues  
and nonprofit theaters manage soaring costs, while 
directing agencies beyond DCLA—including NYCEDC, 
NYC DOT, NYC Parks, and Small Business Services—  
to fully integrate the arts into their economic develop-
ment, transportation, and public space work. Finally, 
New York should launch the city’s first-ever five-borough 
cultural festival to celebrate local talent, while expanding 
public art and cultural programming in schools, libraries, 
parks, subway stations, and senior centers.
Together, these actions would move New York  
beyond recovery—toward a stronger, more equitable 
creative future in which artists, cultural organizations, 
and creative businesses are recognized not as  
amenities, but as essential infrastructure for the city’s 
continued vitality.
12
Section 2: Creativity as a Catalyst  
for New York’s Economic Future
DESPITE MOUNTING CHALLENGES, THE CREATIVE  
sector remains one of the largest and most important 
parts of New York City’s economy. It accounts for more 
than 7 percent of all private sector employment in the 
five boroughs, but even that greatly undercounts its 
vital role in today’s economy. No other industry has 
more of a catalytic effect: the cultural and creative 
sector serves as a key driver of the city’s now-massive 
tourism economy, it sparks the in-migration of highly 
educated workers and entrepreneurs in fields from  
finance to tech, and it has helped spark equitable  
economic growth in communities from East Flatbush 
to Jamaica. And no other part of the economy contrib-
utes more to the city’s vibrancy and unique identity, 
helping New York stay steps ahead of other cities even 
as several factors—from the city’s rising cost of living 
to the growth in chain retail—threaten to chip away at 
New York’s advantages over other places. 
The size and scope  
of NYC’s creative sector
Our analysis shows that the city’s creative workforce 
totaled 326,093 in 2024. This includes 241,735 
workers employed at businesses and nonprofits in the 
ten industries that make up New York’s creative core 
(performing arts, visual arts, independent artists,  
advertising, applied design, architecture, film and tele-
vision, media streaming and broadcasting, music  
production and publishing), 46,065 self-employed 
workers in creative industries, and 38,293 creative 
workers employed in non-creative industries. 
While a single industry—film and television—  
accounts for nearly a third of all jobs in LA’s creative 
sector, New York City’s is marked by an astounding  
diversity of creative fields. Nine of the ten industries 
that make up the city’s creative economy have at least 
18,000 jobs here, led by film and television (47,453), 
media streaming (46,520), and advertising (44,830). 
New York boasts unparalleled occupational diver-
sity in its creative sector. In 2024, the city was home 
to 15,203 people employed as editors, 13,765 graphic 
designers, 10,394 writers and authors, 9,325 musicians 
and singers, 8,231 art directors, 7,972 architects, 
6,453 photographers, 6,399 actors, 5,309 fashion 
designers, 4,888 interior designers, 4,629 fine artists, 
2,094 craft artists, and 1,236 dancers.
A vibrant sector that is  
expanding in innovative ways
This report documents a number of serious challenges 
and threats facing the creative sector, but there is also 
tremendous growth and momentum. Across the five 
boroughs, new cultural spaces are opening, creative 
businesses are expanding, and artists continue to  
define what’s possible in the city that has long  
inspired them—while once again bringing New Yorkers 
together in the face of adversity.
The energy is visible nearly everywhere. The Bronx 
Music Hall—the borough’s first major independently 
owned cultural venue in more than 50 years—opened 
its doors alongside a surge of new micro-galleries 
from the South Bronx to Chinatown and Bushwick. 
Ridgewood now boasts its first new movie theater in 
decades, launched by documentarian John Wilson. 
Electronic music is booming again, with the number 
of working DJs doubling citywide as venues like  
Nowadays, Public Records, and Basement have  
fueled a nightlife resurgence. Meanwhile, ArtBuilt has 
created more than 50,000 square feet of below-mar -
ket studio space at the Brooklyn Army Terminal, the 
People’s Theatre Project has broken ground on a new 
multidisciplinary arts center in Inwood, and the  
Studio Museum in Harlem has reopened after an 
eight-year renovation.
The creative economy is also expanding and diver-
sifying geographically. Over the past decade, cultural 
nonprofits have grown 73.8 percent in Queens, 67.5 
percent in the Bronx, and 55 percent in Brooklyn, 
while the number of creative businesses in Brooklyn 
alone has more than doubled. Altogether, the city is 
13
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
Total Workers in NYC's Creative Industries
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from Lightcast. Created with Datawrapper
NYC's Creative Workforce: 2004 – 2024
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from Lightcast. Created with Datawrapper

14
Total Workers in NYC's Creative Sub-Industries 
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from Lightcast. Created with Datawrapper

15
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
now home to a record 16,911 creative business loca-
tions—up 6 percent since 2019 and 13.4 percent over 
the past decade, outpacing overall business growth.
Brooklyn alone now has 60,201 artists who call 
the borough home. That’s more than the total for  
Seattle (58,298) and San Francisco (41,012), nearly 
double the number of artists living in Austin (30,754), 
and well over twice the number living in Nashville 
(26,312), Portland (21,404), and Philadelphia (20,701). 
Even factoring in job losses since the pandemic, 
New York City’s creative workforce has grown 24.6 per-
cent over the past 20 years, far outpacing employment 
growth in many of the city’s other leading industries, 
including finance and insurance (which grew by 12.9 
percent), retail (which increased by 7.5 percent), and 
legal services (which was unchanged).
Some of the strongest gains have come in fields 
tied to new media and creative technology. Music  
production jobs are up 16.4 percent since 2015,  
reflecting both the city’s unparalleled concentration 
of recording studios and the growing demand from 
podcasting, content creation, and digital media. The 
number of DJs has increased by 14.1 percent since 
2019, and by 106.8 percent over the past decade, 
fueled by the city’s vibrant nightlife scene. The city 
has also seen increases in the number of fine artists 
(up 13.5 percent since 2019), special effects artists 
and animators (8.3 percent), and authors and writers 
(1.9 percent). 
There are also several emerging areas of growth 
across the city’s creative sector, including:
Podcast Production
New York has become a national hub for audio story -
telling and podcast production. Leading companies 
like WNYC Studios, Pushkin Industries, Gotham  
Productions, and Blue Chalk produce some of the 
most popular and acclaimed podcasts globally. In the 
first quarter of 2025, New York–based producers were 
responsible for 22 percent of the shows on Edison  
Research’s Top 50 Podcasts in the U.S. , including  
The Daily, This American Life, Radiolab, and Serial.14 
While the podcasting industry has gone through a  
period of consolidation and layoffs at major media 
firms, New York City remains its creative and technical 
epicenter—sustained by a deep pool of production  
talent, studios, and global media connections.15
Maker Economy
Since Etsy’s founding 20 years ago, New York City’s 
maker economy has flourished—spanning everything 
from handmade crafts and small-batch manufacturing 
to artisanal food products and design goods. Over the 
past decade, employment among craft artists has 
surged by 62.5 percent, one of the fastest growth 
rates of any creative occupation.
Today’s New York–based makers are building 
global brands while maintaining roots in the city’s arts 
community and broader creative economy. Brooklyn-  
founded APOTHEKE—launched by Chrissy Fichtl, an 
FIT graduate who began experimenting with soap-mak-
ing in her Brooklyn kitchen—sold 100,000 candles in 
2022 and is now carried by more than 600 major  
retailers worldwide.16 She’s joined by a growing cohort 
of artist- and designer-led studios shaping the city’s 
maker economy—like Franca NYC, a Brooklyn ceramics 
studio whose hand-built pieces are now stocked by  
retailers nationwide, and Cold Picnic, a Queens- and 
Brooklyn–based textile design duo whose small-batch 
rugs and home goods have developed a cult following. 
Across the five boroughs, local vendors showcase 
their work at a growing number of markets like the 
Renegade Craft Fair, the Queens Craft Brigade—which 
just celebrated its eighth anniversary—and Cottage 
Row Curiosities in Staten Island’s Snug Harbor, 
launched in 2021.17
Creator Economy 
The creator economy—made up of social media influ -
encers and online content creators who turn clicks 
and views into income—is a relatively new addition to 
New York City’s creative ecosystem. According to Influ-
encity, 1.2 million influencers lived in New York State 
in 2022—second only to California’s 2.1 million—but 
the gap has narrowed sharply in recent years as  
creators continue to flock to the Big Apple.18 Seven of 
the top 25 creators on Rolling Stone’s 2025 list live in 
New York City—matching California’s total.19
As the landscape of work and marketing contin -
ues to evolve, the creator economy is becoming an  
increasingly important part of New York’s broader  
creative ecosystem—one that has the potential to  
support neighborhood businesses and local culture, 
and provide new income streams for artists and entre-
preneurs alike. 
16
Cultural nonprofits grow by a third over the last decade
Including a 13 percent increase since 2019
 
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from Lightcast. Created with Datawrapper
NYC's biggest competitive edge
The creative sector in New York City has a bigger share of national jobs  
than most other major industries
 
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from Lightcast. Created with Datawrapper
17
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
Culture Sparks Lasting  
Economic Growth
Key to New York City’s tourism economy 
Arts and culture are the backbone of New York City’s 
$74 billion tourism economy—and one of its most 
powerful sources of tax revenue and job growth. In 
2024, the city welcomed nearly 64 million visitors, 
nearly matching the pre-pandemic record, with tour -
ism expected to surpass 68 million in 2025. Driving 
that recovery is New York’s unmatched cultural land-
scape: 29 million visitors attended a museum, gallery, 
theater, or other cultural site last year, and nearly 
three-quarters of international travelers said they 
came specifically for arts and culture.
That cultural pull has helped revive surrounding 
industries—hotels, restaurants, retail, and nightlife—
that together sustain hundreds of thousands of jobs. 
“Culture is really a major draw for tourists to New York 
City,” says Julie Coker, president and CEO or NYC  
Tourism + Conventions. 
Beyond the city’s many museums and theaters, 
the city’s creative vibrancy animates neighborhoods—
from music festivals in the Bronx to galleries in  
Ridgewood and dance venues in Harlem—ensuring 
that the benefits of tourism ripple far beyond Midtown  
and Manhattan.
A magnet for talent and  
a vital competitive advantage
In today’s mobile, talent-driven economy, New York’s 
arts and culture ecosystem is one of the city’s great -
est competitive advantages. As remote work gives 
more people the freedom to live anywhere—and  
as the cost of living continues to rise—it’s the city’s  
creative energy and unmatched ecosystem of cultural 
assets that enables New York to continue attracting 
people from across the country and around the 
globe—and keeps people from leaving. From its  
theaters and galleries to its nightlife and design 
scene, the creative ecosystem is an outsized part of 
what makes New York worth the struggle.
A 2023 Partnership for New York City survey found 
that nearly two-thirds of private-sector employees 
ranked arts and entertainment among the top reasons 
they want to stay in New York—second only to the city’s 
restaurants. “Young people want to work at a cool 
company, but mostly it's the dynamic and constantly 
changing cultural and entertainment offerings of the 
city,” says Merrill Pond, executive vice president for  
research and policy at the Partnership. "Talented young 
workers can choose placements almost anywhere in 
the world. And New York is always the number one 
pick.”
Increasingly, workers aren’t just seeking jobs—
they’re seeking communities where life and work  
intersect. “If you think of Brooklyn as the quintessential 
live–work–play model, the arts community is what 
makes much of the ‘play’ possible,” says Brooklyn 
Chamber of Commerce president and CEO Randy Peers.
Arts colleges as economic engines 
New York’s world-class art and design schools don’t just 
educate artists—they power the city’s creative economy. 
These institutions attract talent from around the world, 
create thousands of jobs, and sustain a steady pipeline 
of creative workers for the city’s industries.
No other place matches New York’s concentration 
of art schools. In fact, New York City boasts five colleges 
and universities among the nation’s 30 best graduate 
schools for fine arts, according to U.S. News and World 
Report: Columbia University (#10), New School—Par -
sons School of Design (#15), Pratt Institute (#15), 
School of Visual Arts (#23), and CUNY—Hunter College 
(#23). Los Angeles is the only other city with more 
than one school in the top 30 (it has two). 
Employment at New York City’s art schools has 
grown 23.2 percent over the past decade—from 7,620 
to 9,387—and now supports more jobs than the city’s 
entire graphic design or newspaper industries. Mean-
while, demand keeps rising: Pratt Institute enrolled its 
largest-ever painting and drawing classes last fall—
both with waiting lists—and applications to Parsons School 
of Design have jumped 64 percent since 2016.20
Graduates of these programs are helping to sus -
tain and diversify New York’s creative ecosystem—
from exhibiting fine art to launching tattoo studios, 
galleries, fashion brands, and design firms. At LaGuardia 
Community College, students are taught not only to 
hone their craft but to navigate the realities of New 
York’s creative economy and think entrepreneurially. 
“Students know the quantity of opportunity is greater 
here, even though the hustle is harder,” says Dahlia 
Elsayed, director of LaGuardia’s fine arts program
18
Export powerhouse, global brand
New York may be the world’s financial capital, but its 
most influential exports come from the creative economy. 
From fashion and film to publishing, advertising, and 
design, the city’s creative industries shape culture—
and drive commerce—on a global scale.
In 2023, art exports from the New York metropoli-
tan area totaled roughly $8 billion, making it the city’s 
second-largest export by value after jewelry and  
precious gems, according to the U.S. International 
Trade Administration. From Chelsea galleries and  
Midtown auction houses to independent studios in 
Brooklyn and the Bronx, New York’s creative output 
reaches every corner of the world.
These industries aren’t just exporting culture, 
they’re fueling growth at home. Creative businesses 
have been central to Brooklyn’s economic renais -
sance, adding more than 2,100 new firms since 2014. 
“We’re facilitating the creative economy in our own 
way,” says Randy Peers, president of the Brooklyn 
Chamber of Commerce. “Visitors from across the 
country and around the world want to experience 
Brooklyn—it’s become a brand in itself.” 
That global brand power extends citywide. From 
the I Love New York logo to skylines immortalized on 
screen and the sounds that have shaped genera -
tions—from hip hop and salsa to electronic cumbia 
and drill—the city’s creative output has defined New 
York’s image for decades. Even for those who have 
never set foot here, “New York” signals imagination, 
hustle, and reinvention—an identity inextricably tied to 
its creative sector.
Scene from HILDEGARD by Sarah Kirkland Snider, directed by Elkhanah Pulitzer which will premiere in NYC in 2026 at the PROTOTYPE Festival. 
Photo by Angel Origgi
19
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
Section 3: NYC’s Artists and the Arts  
Confront Major Challenges 
Costs are rising much faster than wages, 
squeezing artists out
Artists in New York have long struggled to achieve  
financial security. But by working a part-time job as  
a waiter, editor, substitute teacher or some other side 
gig, many artists were able to devote sufficient time  
to their art while earning enough to make ends meet. 
Over the past few years, artists say, the calculus has 
shifted in New York—costs have far outpaced artist  
income. Many have had to take on second or third 
jobs just to afford the city’s skyrocketing costs, leaving 
scant time to dedicate to their art. 
“ I think there is a bit of back-of-the-envelope  
math that every artist here does,” says Moe Yousuf,  
president and CEO of the Lower Manhattan Cultural 
Council. “‘How long can I do this before I need to get a 
full-time job?’ Or, ‘I’m working five jobs right now—how 
long before my artistic practice stops being fundamental, 
Brooklyn is home to the most working artists in the city
Employed artists
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from the 2023 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates.  
Created with Datawrapper

20
and I need to leave New York City?’ There are so many 
talented artists who stop making work because of that.”
Roughly a decade ago, creative workers in New 
York earned 15 percent less than national average. 
Today, thanks to the city’s fast-rising cost of living and 
flat incomes, they make 23 percent less. The median 
hourly wage for musicians and singers in the city is 
$10.28 less than the national average. For dancers, it 
is $6.63 less. For actors, it is $3.75 less. 
Across dozens of interviews, artists described the 
rough calculations that dictate their lives—and how  
increasing costs, stagnant arts-related income, and 
diminishing institutional support have pushed even 
the most resourceful to a breaking point. 
“If any one of those funding pipelines is slow or 
atrophies, your livelihood is at risk,” says Rasu Jilani, 
executive director of the Brooklyn Arts Council. “That 
is a reality for most artists in the ecosystem. They are 
walking the tightrope of affordability and livability in 
New York City.”
Soon after Jesús Benavente moved to New York City 
in 2013 after earning an MFA at Rutgers University, he 
realized that piecing together income would become a 
full-time job in itself. That challenge has become nearly 
impossible as costs have soared. His practice of 
rasquachismo—“cobbling things together to make it 
work” in the Chicano way—extends beyond his art into 
how he earns a living. He teaches a class once a week 
(about $300), works as an art handler, picks up jobs 
on TaskRabbit, and applies for grants and residencies 
whenever he can. But this constant hustle is no longer 
adding up.
“Before, I was like, ‘If I live really cheaply, cut all 
the corners, I can get away with $2,000 a month.’  
I would be okay enough to survive. But inflation really 
messed up the game plan,” Benavente says. “It’s just 
no longer the case. Now I need $3,500 a month.”
When faced with potential financial shortfalls,  
artists feel pressured to accept any gig or project. 
Many have expressed the need to work more—what 
was once a part-time hustle has now become a full-time 
job—to earn enough money to live and create.
After finishing graduate school, Zalika Azim, 34, a 
Brooklyn-born multimedia artist, “daisy-chained” a  
series of adjunct teaching positions at art schools to 
make money. Those adjunct roles—paying between 
$9,000 and $12,000 per semester—were nowhere 
near enough to cover rent, living expenses, and studio 
costs in New York. She took a full-time job to offset 
that gap. “My days are usually 5 a.m. to 11 p.m.,” she 
said, completing studio admin before her 9-to-5 and 
working on a six-month residency after hours. “I do 
feel like that’s really, deeply impacted my ability to be 
present in my practice.”
Those who want to stay in New York and continue 
making their art describe their lives as a series of 
compromises and sacrifices. David Kennedy-Cutler, 
45, credits his ability to live in the city to the relative 
stability of his long-term lease in East Williamsburg 
and his independent art-installation business. “The 
reality is that I have to do something else to cover those 
expenses,” he says. He estimates that 80 percent of 
his income comes from art handling and 20 percent 
from selling his art. For Kennedy-Cutler and his wife, 
who also works in the arts, the trade-off is clear: 
“There’s no chance, really, for us—with the money that 
we make every year—to raise a family and also continue 
to do the jobs that we do.”
It’s little wonder, then, that New York City’s resi -
dent artist population is declining. Kahlil Robert Irving, 
32, is among those who’ve left. He moved back home 
to St. Louis, Missouri, in 2020 for personal reasons 
and because rent had become untenable—despite a 
series of professional successes, including works  
exhibited at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA),  
the New Museum Triennial, and the Whitney Museum 
of American Art. The move brought peace of mind,  
he says, but also distance from the networks and  
institutions that once fueled his career.
Housing is the biggest challenge, by far
New York City’s housing crisis is no secret—but its  
impacts are especially severe for the creative workforce, 
whose incomes have failed to keep up with the city’s 
skyrocketing rents. Over the past decade, median 
household rent in New York City increased 42 percent, 
while the median income for workers in creative indus-
tries grew just 25 percent—far below the citywide gain 
of 44 percent.21
The gap is even wider for artists. According to an 
analysis of data from a statewide survey conducted by 
Creatives Rebuild New York, nearly 90 percent of New 
York City artists earned less than $50,000 in 2022—
well below the city’s $57,000 median income.22 
“Artists can’t afford an average median rent  
because there isn’t enough investment in the New York 
City arts economy to achieve an average median  
21
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
Creatives shift towards freelance work
While workers employed in businesses in creative industries decline post-pandemic, 
self-employment and independent artists surge
 
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from Lightcast. Created with Datawrapper
Adjusted for NYC's high costs, creative workers earn less than the U.S. median
Creative workers in New York now earn 23 percent less than the national hourly  
median wage, down from 15 percent less a decade ago
 
 
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from Lightcast. The figures above represent the weighted average of median 
hourly wages of creative occupations. This calculation was based on Brooklyn's cost of living. Created with Datawrapper

22
New York City's wage gap
When adjusted for the city's high cost of living, the median hourly wage for creative workers 
in NYC is less than the median for the country for every creative occupation analyzed
 
 
 
 
This calculation was based on Brooklyn's cost of living. 
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from Lightcast. Created with Datawrapper
At the same time, creative employment is shifting  
toward freelance and contract work: self-employment  
in creative industries has grown 10.3 percent since  
2019, and the number of independent artists, writers,  
and performers is up 65.6 percent over the past  
decade, creating greater economic insecurity
23
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
Resident Artists by Neighborhood 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resident artists defined as those whose occupations include: Artists and related workers, Actors, Producers and  
directors, Dancers and choreographers, Music directors and composers, Musicians and singers, Disc jockeys,  
except radio, Editors, Writers and authors, Photographers
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from the 2023 and 2013 American Community Survey 5-Year  
Estimates. Created with Datawrapper

24
salary,” says Karesia Batan, founder of the Queensboro 
Dance Festival.
The result is visible across the city: fewer artists are 
able to stay. “Over the years, as the cost of living goes 
up here, more and more artists leave because they 
can’t survive,” says Judith Insell, professional musician 
and executive director of Bronx Arts Ensemble.
 Sade Lythcott, CEO of the National Black Theatre, 
puts it bluntly: “Without New York City bringing  
back true affordable housing—bringing back the  
artists preference, creating affordable workspaces  
for artists—there really is no way for artists to maintain 
a livelihood here.”
Other cities have tackled this problem head-on. 
Since 2015, cities across the U.S. have built more 
than 4,000 new affordable artist housing units—but 
New York has built zero. That’s a striking reversal from 
the 1970s, when the city pioneered affordable artist 
housing with Westbeth and Manhattan Plaza, two 
models that remain iconic examples of how artist 
housing can stabilize creative communities and revi -
talize neighborhoods.
That failure has ripple effects across the eco -
system, especially for organizations serving under -
represented artists. 
“Keeping artists of color in the city and close to 
each other has been key to their ability to create,” says 
Lythcott. “No one can imagine a more innovative,  
vibrant future than the artists. And if the artists can’t 
live here, then this is no longer a city that’s viable for 
all the reasons it’s unique and singular in the world.”
Audiences have returned to New York’s 
stages—but not in the same way. 
Theaters, music venues, and cultural institutions have 
seen their costs increase in recent years—for labor,  
insurance, electricity, and other things. But at the 
same time, revenues from ticket sales have taken a 
big hit due to fundamental shifts in who is attending 
live performances since the pandemic. The combination 
of higher costs and lower earned revenue has left many 
arts organizations financially vulnerable.
“Post pandemic, audiences are unpredictable,” 
says Alyssa Alpine, director of the CUNY Dance Initiative. 
“It’s harder to get people to come out to see a live show 
and you are counting on less earned revenue than you 
did in the past.”
 “Audiences are not returning to in-person programs 
at the levels before the pandemic,” adds Sami Abu 
Shumays, deputy director of Flushing Town Hall. 
At the Nuyorican Poets Cafe, executive director 
Caridad De la Luz recalls that in the 1990s, “the place 
was packed,” but since the pandemic, “there’s only 
been very few moments that that has happened.”
Even before COVID-19, many organizations were 
already seeing their “typical, reliable audience member 
kind of aging out,” notes Sade Lythcott, CEO of the  
National Black Theatre. “They’re not being replenished 
at the same rate—and that’s been exacerbated 
through the pandemic and growing incidents and  
concerns around public safety.” The result is a younger 
but far less predictable audience, reflecting both New 
York’s affordability crisis and broader changes in how 
people spend their time and money.
At The Billie Holiday Theatre in Bed-Stuy, executive 
director Shadawn Smith has seen those shifts first -
hand. “Yesterday’s economy is not today’s economy,” 
she says. “Yesterday’s price is not today’s price.” Long-
time patrons—often older residents—expect ticket 
prices to remain around $25, even as production 
costs soar. A newer audience, largely in their 20s and 
30s, is willing to pay more but expects an immersive 
experience: music, drinks, and community. But with 
higher production values, the gap between revenue 
and expenses only grows. 
“We’re seeing larger gaps in terms of our costs 
and what folks are willing to pay,” says Smith. “And 
with the instability and insecurity around institutional 
funding, whether it’s from government or from philan-
thropy, everybody is struggling and reevaluating.”
Changing audience behavior has also disrupted 
the economics of live performance. “Young people 
don’t drink as much, which is very good—but not good 
for an economy that is based on liquor sales,” says 
Olivier Conan, founder of Barbès, a performance 
space in Park Slope that opened in 2002. Meanwhile, 
subscription models have faltered. “The challenge  
today is getting people to commit,” says Michael Royce, 
executive director of the New York Foundation for the 
Arts. “People may decide not to go to a play, a symphony, 
a ballet—they may decide to watch something on their 
screen. Young people especially don’t want any controls 
on their culture.”
For many performing arts organizations, that  
unpredictability makes planning nearly impossible. “If 
people no longer wish to go out in the way they used 
25
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
to, the vulnerability of putting together a dance piece 
for one night becomes even more vulnerable,” Royce 
adds. “Dancers and choreographers find it harder and 
harder to do their work simply because they just don’t 
know if anyone will show up.”
At the same time, demand for cultural connection 
has not disappeared—it has simply shifted. Toya Lillard, 
executive director of 651 Arts, a hub for Black artists 
in Fort Greene, points to overwhelming demand for 
free and low-cost events. “BAM [has] a free music  
series and they had 1,200 RSVPs for 300 spots,” she 
says. “People do want the option to just not come, not 
show up, and have no stakes involved.” Yet 651 Arts’ 
own performances have been packed since opening 
its new space in January 2025. “Our audiences, 
they’re desperate for a reason to gather,” she says.
Some organizations are responding by dropping 
ticketing altogether, with the aim of replacing the  
revenue with public and philanthropic funding. At Bronx 
Arts Ensemble, executive director Judith Insell says 
they realized they could serve Bronxites far better by 
eliminating admission fees entirely. “It became very 
clear that we had to get rid of the ticket to actually 
serve the community. So our concerts are free.”
But for many institutions, this new reality has  
exposed longstanding fragilities. “It’s not a big secret 
that COVID made a sector that was already unstable, 
even more unstable,” says Leonard Jacobs, executive 
director of the Jamaica Center for Arts and Learning. 
“What it really revealed is the lack of sustainability in 
the field.”
Costs for performance venues and cultural 
nonprofits have gone through the roof—led  
by insurance
Even as the challenges of the pandemic receded, the 
economics of running a small venue or performing 
arts organization have become nearly impossible.  
Insurance costs, rent, wages, materials, and utilities 
have all surged since the pandemic, and with audiences 
still uneven, many organizations are caught in a losing 
equation—spending more just to bring in less.
For Dianna Mora, co-founder of the Brooklyn  
music venue Friends and Lovers, every week is a  
balancing act. Weeknight crowds have thinned, and 
even weekend audiences are leaving earlier, forcing 
her to add a third Saturday event just to stay afloat. 
She still owes roughly $50,000 in back rent from the 
shutdown years, and her insurance costs have tripled 
since opening a decade ago.
At Barbès, the beloved Park Slope bar and perfor-
mance space, co-founder Olivier Conan says insurance 
premiums have grown from $4,000 to $22,000 a 
year—just one example of how expenses have spiraled.
New data from ArtsPool—an organization that  
provides workforce administration and financial  
management support to small and mid-sized arts  
nonprofits—underscores the widening gap: from 2019 
to 2024, member organizations saw median revenue 
rise only 2.2 percent while median operating expenses 
climbed an astonishing 64 percent.
Some venues have already buckled under the 
pressure. Our Wicked Lady, a Bushwick music venue 
that opened in 2015, recently closed its doors after 
insurance costs more than doubled since before the 
pandemic. Co-founders Keith Hamilton and Zach Glass 
even scaled back programming in an attempt to man-
age expenses, cutting youth events that would have 
added roughly $50,000 in annual insurance costs.
But insurance is just one piece of the problem.  
“It costs about 50 percent more to put on a show  
today than before the pandemic,” says Beth Morrison,  
President and Creative Producer of Beth Morrison 
Projects. “But with so many in our audience struggling 
to afford this city, really everyone is suffering. So I really 
feel there needs to be a massive intervention by the 
city and the state.”
While costs are rising and revenues are down, 
public and philanthropic funding hasn’t filled  
the gap 
Given the widening gap between revenues and  
expenses, public and philanthropic funding is more 
vital than ever for New York City’s arts ecosystem. But 
public funding has struggled to keep pace with an  
expanding cultural landscape and growing needs—
and philanthropic funding is shifting away from the 
arts amid rising economic pressures and federal cuts 
to social programs.
While funding has grown at both the state and city 
level, it has not kept up with the demands of a rapidly 
expanding sector. The New York State Council on the 
Arts (NYSCA), for instance, has a budget of about $87 
million for operating grants—a critical source of gener-
al operating support for cultural nonprofits statewide. 
But even as funding has increased since 2020, NY -
SCA’s operating grant budget has declined 35.9 per -
cent since 1990 after adjusting for inflation.
26
At the city level, New York City’s FY2025 budget 
includes $59.3 million for the Cultural Development 
Fund, which provides operating grants to hundreds of 
nonprofit arts groups. Yet these public dollars have 
not kept up with the rapid growth in the number of  
organizations. There are now more than 5,500 cultural 
nonprofits citywide, and hundreds—if not thousands—
of additional community groups without formal nonprofit 
status. The number of cultural nonprofits has increased 
32 percent citywide since 2014, including 55 percent 
in Brooklyn, 68 percent in the Bronx, and 74 percent 
in Queens.
Even when grants are awarded, many arrive late or 
inconsistently. “In the 20 years that I’ve directed, this is 
the most variable and unreliable that I’ve seen in the 
city,” says one executive director of a dance company. 
Meanwhile, major private funders have begun to 
scale back or shift priorities away from the arts—redi -
recting resources toward social services, basic needs, 
and other purposes in response to federal cuts. “We’re 
actually losing funding for the arts , and we feel it 
acutely,” says Karesia Batan, founder of the Queensboro 
Dance Festival. “Funders are turning away from arts 
and culture and funding other sectors—not in addition 
to the arts, it’s instead of the arts. So that’s been  
a looming problem that just continues to get a little  
bit bigger.”
Fortunately, some funders are stepping up  
resources for the arts. For instance, the Howard  
Gilman Foundation—New York City’s largest performing 
arts funder—increased its grantmaking budget by $5 
million in 2025. However, many other philanthropic 
foundations are acting cautiously as they await the full 
toll of federal funding cuts to New York’s social safety 
net over the next 12 to 18 months. 
With public and philanthropic dollars falling short 
and arriving late, even established organizations are 
operating on thin margins. For smaller arts groups,  
especially those serving communities of color and 
low-income neighborhoods, the loss of a single grant 
can mean cutting programs—or closing altogether.
It’s not just human services organizations that 
are struggling to get paid on time by government—
arts organizations aren’t getting paid, either. 
New York City’s failure to pay nonprofits on time has 
long plagued the human services sector, with at  
least $1 billion in unpaid invoices owed to providers  
contracted with just seven city agencies. But arts  
organizations are facing the same problem—often 
with even less visibility.
“The city has notoriously not gotten out award  
letters before December,” says Gail Nathan, former  
executive director of the Bronx River Art Center. “That’s 
half a year into the fiscal year. Not only do we not have 
any money coming down the pike from the city to do all 
our programming that we have to do starting July 1,  
but we don’t even know what we’re going to get until 
December.” She adds that payments can take months 
after that: “Sometimes it’s in June—the end of the  
fiscal year—and we still haven’t received the 80  
percent upfront for the grants we were awarded the 
previous July.”
For smaller organizations that rely on city funding, 
the consequences can be devastating. “Our contracts 
are small, and especially in the scheme of New York 
City, we shouldn’t have to wait months and months 
and months to get the money,” says Risa Shoup,  
co–executive director of the Alliance of Resident The -
atres/New York. “It’s really devastating to smaller 
groups, and smaller groups rely disproportionately on 
public funding, because they don’t meet the threshold 
for budget size for private philanthropic institutions, 
and so they really need those public contracts to come 
through and come through quickly.”
The delays ripple across the ecosystem—from  
artists waiting for grant checks to organizations  
struggling to meet payroll. “It delays money to all of the 
different artists, individuals that art supports, and 
many organizations like myself that really depend on 
these more accessible redistribution grants because 
of the bureaucracy of applying for DCLA money,” says 
STooPS Art & Community Founder/Director Kendra J. 
Ross. “These delays are causing lots of uncertainty 
and chaos. As a founder and director, how am I going 
to pay my team? How am I going to pay myself?”
The problem extends well beyond the Department 
of Cultural Affairs. “Once you become a vendor [with 
the Department of Education], you still have to go 
through a bidding process,” says the executive director 
of one dance company. “If you ask the Department of 
27
Education how long it takes, they tell you six months 
from beginning to end. We’ve been at it for a year, and 
we’re still not done with the price negotiation.”
Other city agencies have also contributed to the  
financial strain. “The Department of Transportation 
said, no, you should invoice us after your final event,” 
says Emily Vartanian of General Mischief Dance Theater, 
which has hosted a series of free public performances 
and movement lessons. “That means that, if we do 
multiple events spread over four months, we are  
expected carry that payroll for seven months or longer 
before we receive payment which is not sustainable for 
most small businesses, especially nonprofits.”
“Agency contracts have been super late in recent 
years,” adds Sami Abu Shumays, deputy director of 
Flushing Town Hall. “That’s affecting a lot of organiza-
tions in the city. So there are costs associated with 
late contracts—people are fronting money that they 
didn’t have to before.”
Each delay forces arts organizations—many already 
operating on shoestring budgets—to front payroll, take 
on debt, or pause programs just to deliver the services 
the city has contracted them to provide. For smaller 
groups in particular, these chronic delays can mean 
the difference between survival and closure.
The actions of the Trump administration pose 
unique threats to NYC’s creative sector
An already difficult environment for New York City’s 
creative community is being compounded by the  
actions and policies of the Trump administration. 
Sharp cuts to the National Endowment for the Arts, 
rising hostility toward immigrants, and new barriers to 
international travel all threaten to weaken the city’s 
cultural ecosystem and global standing.
In May 2025, arts organizations across the country 
began receiving notices that their NEA funding would 
be canceled or withdrawn. 23 The NEA had awarded 
544 grants in New York State for FY2024, totaling 
$15.8 million—at least 446 of them to New York City 
organizations.24 A crowdsourced tracker maintained 
by theater director Annie Dorsen estimates roughly  
$6 million in NEA grants rescinded in the New York 
area alone. (Fortunately, some organizations have 
been able to spend down previously allocated funds or  
petition for grants to be reinstated, although major 
threats still loom on the horizon.) Cuts hit every corner 
of the arts landscape, from literary magazines and 
performing arts companies to education programs, 
residencies, and flagship institutions like Central Park 
SummerStage and the New York City Ballet.
While larger organizations may be able to weather 
the loss, smaller ones face existential consequences. 
Triangle Arts Association, an artist residency active 
since the 1980s, lost a $35,000 grant—17.5 percent 
of its annual budget.25 The Trisha Brown Dance Com-
pany lost $40,000 for a production set to premiere 
weeks later. “We’re already working on this project,” 
says executive director Kirstin Kapustik. “This money, to 
my mind, had already been spent.”26 Leigh Mickelson 
of Dances for a Variable Population, which also lost a 
$40,000 grant, put it bluntly: “Nonprofits are used to 
being scrappy. But this is kind of existential.”27
At the same time, the administration’s punitive 
immigration policies are making it harder for interna -
tional artists to work in New York. Even before new  
policies take full effect, legal fees and visa costs are 
rising sharply. “Progressive changes were made in  
artist immigration policy over the years of the Biden 
Administration," says Matthew Covey, co-founder of 
Tamizdat, a nonprofit that provides pro bono legal aid 
to international artists. “Since the Trump administra -
tion came into office, we are seeing their policies  
consistently making the artist visa process harder, 
more expensive, less reliable, and less equitable.”
The situation is even more precarious for undocu-
mented artists amid a surge in ICE arrests in New York 
City.28 Some have withdrawn from public exhibitions or 
performances entirely. At BronxArtSpace’s ¡Te Amo 
Porque S.O.S. Pueblo!  exhibition this spring, several 
invited immigrant artists declined to participate over 
safety concerns, while organizers omitted last names 
from credits to protect others. “We invited more than 
45 artists and some of them did express a concern, 
and that’s why they decided not to participate,” says 
co-organizer Blanka Amezkua. Andrew Colwell of the 
Center for Traditional Music and Dance recalled that a 
community organizer he knew was stopped by ICE at 
Port Authority: “There [are] people who don’t want to 
even take the train [from Brooklyn] to go to Queens 
because they’re afraid of being detained.”
For many, this growing fear undermines the very 
foundation of New York’s identity as a global capital of 
culture. “It would be tasteless,” says artist Saavedra 
when asked what New York would be like without immi-
grant artists. “Who could live here if we’re not here?”
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
The same climate is discouraging international 
performers and audiences. While no major wave of 
visa denials has yet been recorded, Covey warns that 
new travel bans could further limit mobility. “Protec -
tionism is obviously not useful in [the cultural sector],” 
he says, noting that New York stands to lose enor -
mously if artists choose to perform elsewhere. Already, 
Hungarian-British pianist András Schiff canceled  
a performance with the New York Philharmonic, one  
of several European artists boycotting the U.S. over 
what he called Trump’s “brutal takeover” of the  
Kennedy Center. 29
International tourism is also taking a hit. New York 
City Tourism + Conventions recently cut its 2025 fore-
castby three million visitors, projecting 12.31 million 
international travelers—down from 12.913 million the 
year before and 13.5 million in 2019. 30 Those 13  
million visitors accounted for nearly half of all tourist 
spending across the five boroughs, even though they 
represented only one-fifth of total visitors.31
The decline is especially steep from Canada, the 
city’s second-largest international market. Just 
months into Trump’s second term, summer bookings 
between major Canadian cities and U.S. destinations 
dropped nearly 20 percent compared to the previous 
year. At JFK Airport, arrivals from Canada fell 18.8  
percent.32 Nationwide, New York lost nearly 25,000 
airline seats from Canada in the second quarter of 2025 
after Canada issued, then only partially softened, a 
travel advisory warning its citizens to exercise “normal 
security precautions” when visiting the United States.33
These declines are not abstract. International 
tourists are disproportionately important to New York’s 
creative economy: they account for roughly 21 percent 
of Broadway audiences 34 and help sustain 60 to 65 
percent of jobs in the arts and entertainment sector.35 
With production costs up roughly 50 percent since  
before the pandemic, the loss of even a small share of 
international spending could have significant conse -
quences for venues, theaters, and cultural institutions 
across the city.36
Nuyorican Poets Cafe before its $24-million renovation project, currently underway.
29
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
Section 4: NYC’s Creative Industries  
Facing New Threats
IN THE YEARS LEADING UP TO THE PANDEMIC,  
creative industries were among New York City’s  
fastest-growing sectors. While overall city employment 
increased 31 percent from 2004 to 2019, jobs in film 
and television more than doubled, jobs in architecture 
grew 56.1 percent, industrial design 55 percent,  
advertising 41.2 percent, and fashion 33.2 percent. 
But today, several of them are struggling, raising  
concerns about whether this vital part of the city’s 
economy can regain its footing. 
Each creative sector faces its own set of challenges, 
some that were already underway before the pandemic 
and others that emerged in its wake. National eco -
nomic pressures are also pushing companies to cut 
costs—and in one of the country’s most expensive  
labor markets, those consequences are being felt 
downstream. At the same time, other creative centers 
are growing across the country and overseas. Together, 
these forces threaten New York’s long-standing posi-
tion as the premier global creative capital. 
Film and Television
Just three years ago, New York City’s film and television 
industry was riding high, with jobs in the city’s motion 
picture and sound recording industries reaching a  
record 57,200 in July 2022, nearly double its total 
from 2004 (33,400 jobs). 37 The industry had even  
regained all the jobs lost during the pandemic. But  
today, employment in the city’s film and TV sector  
is 17 percent below that 2022 peak (with 47,500 jobs 
in August 2025) and is facing an array of challenges—
from a slowdown in new streaming programming  
to the now widespread use of cheaper production  
facilities in Europe—that could make it difficult for New 
York to fully recover. 
Following nearly two decades of sustained growth, 
the city’s film and TV sector suffered a sudden slow -
down in 2023 mainly due to the prolonged strike by 
the actors’ and writers’ unions and industry-wide cut-
backs in production. In that one year, employment in 
the city’s film and TV sector declined by nearly 20,000. 
“My studio was at 100 percent occupancy for the 
last several years, prior to business just falling off the 
cliff,” says Doug Steiner, chairman of Steiner Studios, 
the largest production complex in the country outside 
of Hollywood. “My workforce has contracted over the 
last year and a half. Prior to that it was only growing.”
The problems are not unique to New York. Indeed, 
Hollywood has suffered even greater losses during 
this period. 
The rise of streaming transformed the industry in 
the 2010s, with Netflix, Hulu, and Amazon pouring  
billions into original content while traditional studios 
scrambled to keep up. The pandemic supercharged 
demand, driving employment to record highs, but soon 
the market became oversaturated. By the early 2020s, 
streaming giants and studios began scaling back,  
ordering fewer shows and producing shorter seasons. 
Then, back-to-back writers’ and actors’ strikes brought 
production to a near standstill. At the same time, the 
pandemic caused the biggest attendance drop in 
movie history, and with film revenues still below that of 
2019 studios are making fewer films. 
“Companies are spending less, the overall num -
ber of productions is down, and they are producing 
fewer episodes per series,” Steiner says. “All of that 
comes as traditional studios are still finding their way 
to compete in streaming—and most of all, with Netflix.” 
While film and TV production is down globally, the 
combination of rising costs, lagging revenues, and 
competitive tax incentives have pushed more American 
productions overseas to countries like the UK, Canada, 
Hungary, Australia, and beyond. “The business has 
offshored in a significant way,” says Steiner. “Notwith-
standing the hassle of shooting overseas, offshoring 
shoots is providing enough savings to make it worth it. 
These cities [overseas] are equipped with tax credits 
and have seen their film talent pools grow more skilled 
and educated in recent years, making production  
even easier.”
There are reasons for optimism. Over the past two 
years, New York has recovered a decent portion of the 
jobs lost in 2023, and during this period employment 
30
in the city’s film and TV sector has grown faster than 
nearly every other film hub across the country.
Nationwide, the film and TV sector is still down 
10.4 percent from 2022. But in the past year, New 
York has pulled ahead of other cities in terms of job 
growth: jobs in the city grew 7.9 percent.38 During the 
same period, film and TV jobs grew by just 0.3 percent 
in Atlanta, by 0.1 percent in San Francisco and by 1.7 
percent in Atlanta. Some hubs, including Chicago (-1.8 
percent), declined. 
Advertising
For decades, New York City has been the undisputed 
center of the nation’s advertising industry. Indeed, 
New York accounts for 12.1 percent of all advertising 
jobs nationwide and employs more workers in this  
industry than the advertising hubs of Los Angeles,  
Chicago, and Dallas combined. In the years leading up 
to the pandemic, advertising was also one of the city’s 
fastest growing industries, with employment surging 
by a remarkable 56 percent in the fifteen years leading 
up to the pandemic, from 47,300 jobs in August 2004 
to 73,900 in August 2019.39 
But over the past three years, employment in the 
city’s advertising sector has declined by 10 percent, 
from 75,000 jobs in August 2022 to 67,500 in August 
2025. There are fewer jobs in the city’s advertising 
sector today than there were in 2014. 
The pandemic dealt a major blow, but the sector 
recovered to pre-pandemic job levels in 2022 before 
shedding 5,100 jobs in 2023 and another 1,600 jobs 
in 2024. Industry experts cite the adoption of new 
technologies, including AI, as well as increasing com -
petition from where costs are cheaper have contributed 
to the employment losses.
Advertising was already well-suited to remote work 
even before the pandemic, with global clients and 
computer-based tasks making online meetings routine. 
But the acceleration of remote work following the pan-
demic revealed to employers just how much more of 
the job could be done from anywhere.
“There’s no question that New York is still the 
center of gravity, but New York is now not the only city,” 
says Andrew J. Robertson , CEO of BBDO Worldwide, 
a global advertising agency headquartered in New 
York City.
NYC film and TV sector losing jobs after 15 years of gains
 
 
 
 
 
Q1 2005 - Q1 2025 
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from the Quarterly Cenuss of Employment & Wages. Created with Datawrapper

31
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
In the past, individuals pursuing careers in  
advertising primarily headed to New York, Chicago,  
Los Angeles, and San Francisco. Now, opportunities 
are more plentiful in several other cities, many of which 
have been attracting creative workers with their com -
paratively lower housing costs. In Miami, advertising 
jobs have increased by 2,054 (+20 percent) over the 
past decade—from 10,484 in 2014 to 12,538 in 2024— 
and by 1,583 since 2019 (+14 percent). 40 Since the 
pandemic, advertising jobs have also increased in 
Houston (+23 percent, up 1,180 jobs), Austin (+21 
percent, up 1,007 jobs), Dallas (+16 percent, up 2,142 
jobs), and Washington DC (+9 percent, up 798).
“These other cities are now emerging and taking 
some of [New York’s market share],” says Robertson. 
“I don’t believe New York is going to disappear as a 
creative center. It’s just losing its absolute stranglehold. 
We should be worried. I just don’t know how worried.”
It’s not just that several other cities now have a 
critical mass of creative workers that they lacked 10 
or 15 years ago. Employers can reap substantial sav -
ings by shifting some of their work from New York to 
these cheaper locales. Factoring in taxes, healthcare, 
and real estate, Robertson estimates the cost of each 
desk in Dallas at $8,000 compared to $20,000 in 
New York. At the same time, more firms are getting 
comfortable with having offices all over the world:  
Colombia, India, and South Africa have become hotbeds 
for advertising work at a fraction of local costs. 
AI and other new technologies may also be con -
tributing to the industry’s job losses in New York. In a 
recent book, Sam Altman, CEO of OpenAI, is quoted as 
saying, “95 percent of what marketers use agencies, 
strategists, and creative professionals for today will 
easily, nearly instantly, and at almost no cost be han -
dled by AI.” While the true impact of AI on advertising 
jobs remains unclear, it is already changing workflows 
in significant ways.
To be sure, AI also has the potential to dramatically 
boost productivity, enabling agencies to create more 
campaigns in less time. But it could also mean pro -
ducing that work with fewer people. The net effect on 
hiring is still unknown.
Despite the pressures reshaping the industry, 
New York still has an unmatched concentration of  
talent in advertising. “As markets grow more competi-
tive, capturing consumer attention and building a  
distinctive brand has never been more critical,” says 
Sam Appelbaum, Executive Vice President at WITHIN, 
a brand agency in Long Island City. “New York offers 
the environment that enables us to channel this energy 
into the ideas that make this possible.”
After a decade of growth, advertising tumbles during the pandemic - and continues to fall
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from the Quarterly Census of Empoyment and Wages.  
Created with Datawrapper

32
Design
The diversity, energy, and creativity of design industries 
here in New York is not at the same level anywhere else”, 
says Eileen Shaw, Executive Director of NYCxDesign, a 
week-long festival championing New York City’s design 
sector. “But I worry about the shrinking pie.”
Disciplines from all ends of design are struggling. 
Graphic design has been hit the hardest, shedding 
nearly a third of its jobs over the course of the  
decade—from 8,740 in 2014 to 5,946 in 2024. 41  
Employment in industrial design, which grew in the 
years leading to the pandemic, has dropped 29.9  
percent from 2019. Even interior design, initially faring 
better by increased demand from the shutdown,  
remains 2 percent below 2019 employment levels. 
Since the pandemic, New York City’s share of all 
industrial design jobs in the nation declined from 4.2 
percent to 2.9 percent, its share of graphic design 
jobs declined from 5.7 percent to 4.7 percent, and its 
share of interior design jobs declined from 6.4 percent 
to 5.7 percent. What was once a stronghold for design 
talent is losing ground to other regions.
Our analysis of occupational employment data 
confirms these troubling trends. Overall, there are 
nearly 5,500 fewer designers in New York today  
than in 2019. Indeed, while the number of designers 
increased by 24.1 percent from 2004 to 2019—reaching 
an all-time high of 39,266 in 2019—the number has 
since shrunk by 13.9 percent, to 33,811 in 2024. 
During this same five-year period, the number of 
graphic designers decreased by 13.5 percent, from 
15,800 in 2019 to 13,667 in 2024; commercial and 
industrial designers fell by a third, from 1,499 to 
1,012; and set and exhibit designers plunged by nearly 
half, from 2,907 to 1,586. 
The sharp decline in designers in New York runs 
counter to national trends. Indeed, nationwide the 
number of designers has grown by 9.5 percent since 
2019, increasing from 692,316 designers in 2019 to 
757,871 in 2024. The result is that New York is losing 
some of its competitive advantage. As recently as 2019, 
New York City accounted for 5.7 percent of all designers 
in the nation; by 2024 the city’s share was down to 
4.5 percent. Similarly, five years ago, the city accounted 
for 9.2 percent of all set and exhibit designers; today 
it’s just 5.9 percent. Its share of graphic designers fell 
from 5.7 percent to 4.9 percent, and its share of com-
mercial and industrial designers fell from 4.2 percent 
to 3.2 percent. 
Design disciplines struggle to recover to pre-pandemic levels
Change in jobs, 2019-2024
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Center for an Urban Future anaysis fo data from Lightcast. Created with Datawrapper

33
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
Our research suggests a mix of pressures is  
reshaping the field. Design has always had to adapt to 
new technologies, but recent advances—from the rise 
of AI to cheaper, more accessible design software—
can make it easier to produce more work with less  
labor. In January 2025, the World Economic Forum 
predicted that graphic design will be among the fast -
est-declining jobs by 2030 due to advances in AI and 
broadening digital access.42
David Rhodes, president of the School of Visual 
Arts (SVA), observed that employers seem to be more 
cautious amid economic uncertainty and less willing 
to take chances on untested talent. And as routine 
tasks become more automated, the first rungs of the 
career ladder are becoming harder to climb. “There is 
a feeling among our recent graduates that they are 
entering a more challenged job market,” says Rhodes. 
“Right now, it’s harder for younger talent to break into 
the industry.”
Fashion
Few industries are as closely tied to New York’s identity 
as fashion. But that legacy is under threat today. 
“There is a huge recognition that the fashion landscape 
in New York is different from even five years ago,” says 
Tessa Maffucci, assistant chair of the fashion depart -
ment at Pratt Institute.
Employment in the city’s fashion sector has 
steadily eroded over the last decade, declining by 
16.2 percent, from nearly 5,000 jobs in 2014 to 
4,180 in 2024. 43 And according to our analysis of  
occupational data, the number of fashion designers 
working in the city has shrunk by almost one-quarter 
in just five years. In total, there are now just over 5,200 
fashion designers working in New York, compared with 
more than 7,000 in 2019. 
The shrinking pool is not just about total job losses, 
but also New York’s diminishing national influence. 
Ten years ago, nearly one in four fashion designers in 
the United States worked in New York (24.3 percent). 
Today, that share has slipped to fewer than one in six 
(16.8 percent). 
A 2024 study by the Partnership for New York 
pointed to several key factors contributing to the decline: 
the rise of e-commerce and direct-to-consumer sales, 
which have reduced demand for in-person retail and 
showroom jobs; the closure of iconic specialty stores 
like Barneys and Henri Bendel, which once served as 
launching pads for emerging designers; significant 
consolidation among European-based fashion conglom-
erates; and the high cost of living and doing business 
in New York.44
At the same time, the city is losing ground to other 
hubs. “The fashion capitals used to just be Paris and 
New York—now, there’s also Shanghai and Seoul,” 
says David Rhodes of SVA. “These are not just big 
markets, but globally influential cultural forces.” The 
shift of fashion’s center of gravity from New York to 
other fast-growing markets are attracting away young 
talent and businesses that would otherwise find 
home in the city.
34
Once a leader, New York City's creative workforce growth has stalled  
Percent change in creative workforces by city
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Center for an Urban Future anaysis fo data from Lightcast. Created with Datawrapper

35
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
Section 5: The Vital Role of the Arts  
in Times of Crisis
No part of New York’s economy was hit harder by 
the pandemic than the arts. Theaters went dark, galleries 
closed, and venues that doubled as workplaces for 
thousands of artists and creative workers shut down 
overnight. Yet even as artists lost jobs, gigs, and spaces, 
they became catalysts of recovery—helping New Yorkers 
heal, reconnect, and reimagine community life when 
the city needed it most.
With little official guidance in the pandemic’s early 
days, individual artists mobilized through mutual aid. 
Out-of-work Broadway costumers joined the Broadway 
Relief Project, sewing more than two million protective 
gowns for city hospitals. Artists staffed many of the 
grassroots relief operations that sprang up across the 
city, from Bushwick Mutual Aid to South Bronx Mutual 
Aid. In Queens, the collective Little Manila responded to 
the crisis at Elmhurst Hospital—the epicenter of the city’s 
pandemic response—by organizing meal deliveries for 
Filipino nurses and painting a bold mural reading 
“Mabuhay”—“long live!” in Tagalog—a message of soli-
darity and resilience in the city’s hardest-hit neighborhood.
As streets emptied, murals and installations became 
New York’s most visible form of civic expression. Across 
Chinatown, SoHo, and the Bronx, artists covered 
boarded-up storefronts with messages of solidarity 
and protest. One Chinatown mural—bright koi circling 
the phrase “Stop Discriminasian”—became a rallying 
symbol against anti-Asian violence.45 Later that summer, 
artists filled entire city blocks with Black Lives Matter 
murals, transforming public space into a canvas for 
justice and collective mourning. “That’s what artists 
have always done,” says artist Sophia Victor, who  
designed a portion of the Foley Square Black Lives 
Matter mural. “The world stood still, but art kept moving.”
Artists also drew attention to invisible crises. The 
Confined Arts, a nonprofit supporting incarcerated art-
ists, collaborated with Brooklyn theater company The 
24 Hour Plays to dramatize the spread of COVID inside 
prisons. Their online monologues, written from inter -
views with incarcerated New Yorkers, gave audiences 
a rare glimpse of life behind bars during the outbreak—
and reminded the public who was being left behind.
As the city cautiously reopened, performers 
helped restore the social fabric. The NY Phil Bandwag-
on brought classical musicians to every borough in a 
repurposed pickup truck, staging 81 free outdoor con-
certs. “People needed a way to connect, to feel again,” 
says founder Anthony Roth Costanzo, an opera singer. 
These performances—part concert, part civic ritual—
helped reintroduce live art to a city struggling to imag-
ine a future beyond day-to-day survival mode.
In 2021, City Hall formally recognized the arts’ 
role in rebuilding with the launch of City Artist Corps: 
$25 million in grants to 3,000 local artists to create 
and present public work.46 The results were as varied 
as the city itself—from We the People , a dance film 
about resilience by ZCO Dance Project founder  
Zazel-Chavah O’Garra, to Freak the Creek, an ecological 
art festival along Queens’s Flushing Creek. Artists  
presented concerts in public parks, art exhibitions in 
empty storefronts, and public potlucks in closed-off 
streets—bringing communities together after months 
of shutdowns and isolation. It was the largest direct 
investment in artists since the Works Progress  
Administration and a model for how future administrations 
can integrate creative labor into broader strategies to 
drive civic engagement and local economic activity.
36
Section 6: The Impact of AI on  
NYC’s Artists and Creative Economy
Already a global arts capital, New York City has 
emerged as a major center for the intersection of AI 
and art over the past decade. As early as 2019—  
before AI-generated art entered the mainstream—New 
York Live Arts hosted an AI x Art Symposium as part of 
its Live Ideas series.47 That same year, ARTECHOUSE 
opened its Chelsea Market location, quickly becoming 
a destination for tourists and digital art enthusiasts.
The city’s flagship institutions have since followed 
suit. The Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) has featured 
installations by two rising stars of the AI art world—Re-
fik Anadol in 2022 and Sasha Stiles in 2025—that use 
AI models to reimagine the museum’s collection on its 
digital wall.48 In spring 2024, the Whitney Museum of 
American Art opened an exhibit centered on Harold 
Cohen’s AARON, the earliest AI artmaking program, 
accompanied by a live discussion among artists 
across disciplines—including a composer, an Oscar-  
nominated director, and a visual artist—about AI’s role 
in their practice. 49 Smaller institutions across the  
boroughs are also engaging with the medium: in 2025, 
artist Lu Yang presented separate AI-influenced exhibits 
at the Queens Museum of the Moving Image and at 
Amant in Brooklyn.50 For better or worse, AI art is here 
to stay—and New York City stands to both benefit from 
its promise and grapple with its risks.
AI tools offer dizzying creative possibilities, and 
many artists are finding innovative ways to use them. 
One is multimedia artist Marc da Costa, whose digital 
video installation The Golden Key —a collaboration 
with director Matthew Niederhauser—was on view at 
the Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM) in January 
2025. Visitors spoke into a microphone, and da Costa’s 
AI model responded by generating visuals and a  
storyline in real time, mythologizing audience input. 
He described the work as “an exploration of myth,  
mythology, and the mythic elements of AI,” simultane-
ously using and interrogating the new medium.
AI-inspired projects like The Golden Key also allow 
artists to engage audiences with urgent social ques -
tions. At an October 2025 workshop at Asia Art Archive 
in America, the researcher–artist duo zzyw led partici-
The diversity deficit: creative industries
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from the 2023 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates.  
Created with Datawrapper

37
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
pants through Mountain of Many Voices, an interactive 
model that lets viewers collaboratively build a world in 
real time. The project aimed to “lay the groundwork for 
deeper discussions about resisting computational 
control,” followed by a presentation of the artists’  
critical research on autonomous AI.51
Growing interest in AI across industries has also 
translated into new funding opportunities for artists using 
the technology. In 2023, the Guggenheim announced 
a five-year partnership with LG to launch the LG  
Guggenheim Art and Technology Initiative, which includes 
an annual $100,000 unrestricted award for a ground-
breaking artist in technology-based art.52 The inaugural 
recipient was Brooklyn-based AI artist Stephanie Dinkins, 
whose work reached wider audiences through the 
partnership. Funding opportunities extend beyond 
the visual arts: in 2024, the Doris Duke Foundation 
launched its Performing Arts Technologies Lab , a 
first-of-its-kind accelerator supporting digital innovation 
in the performing arts. Of the 20 inaugural grantees, 
eight were New York City–based artists—more than 
from any other state—spanning ballet, jazz, lighting 
and sound design, and arts accessibility. 53
Beyond the arts, creative industries such as adver-
tising are also adapting AI tools to reimagine workflows. 
“Generative tools have quickly become a standby for 
us,” says Lawrence O’Toole, head of creative innova-
tion at The Working Assembly, a boutique agency that 
uses AI to visualize ad concepts on tight deadlines.
But just as AI can make creative work easier, it 
can also threaten it. One major concern is the use of 
AI to replace creative labor. Grammy-nominated pro -
ducer Bill Meade was recently hired to assemble a 
soundtrack and asked to use AI to generate back -
ground instruments to save money. “I’ve been using AI 
tools for the last few years, but I [had] never been  
specifically asked to basically lose people,” he says. Now 
chair of the AI Committee for the American Federation 
of Musicians (AFM) Local 802, Meade is advocating 
for industry-wide guidelines to protect artists.
In response to these concerns, Governor Kathy 
Hochul signed Senate Bill S7676B in December 2024, 
requiring contracts to secure an actor’s consent  
before using their voice or likeness in AI-generated 
content. “That has been the basis of everything  
we’ve done in this space,” says Rebecca Damon, 
SAG-AFTRA’s New York executive director. “Not to be 
against AI, but to be figuring out how it works, and 
what the future of work looks like in light of it.”
Equally troubling are AI’s implications for copyright 
and intellectual property. Several lawsuits have been filed 
against AI companies that trained image-generation 
models on artists’ work without permission.54 Although 
no landmark ruling has yet been issued, Amelia Brankov, 
a New York–based art law and copyright attorney,  
believes the cases have merit: “When you’re using a 
creative work to create another creative work that 
competes with the original, I think there is a strong 
argument that it’s copyright infringement—or if it’s not, 
then maybe the law should be changed to prevent 
that.” Even creatives who use AI regularly remain cautious: 
O’Toole’s agency, for example, prohibits presenting 
AI-generated material as original content because of 
its legal uncertainty.
These intellectual property concerns are fueling a 
growing backlash. When Christie’s New York announced 
a February 2025 auction of AI-generated works, more 
than 5,700 artists signed an open letter demanding 
its cancellation. They cited the use of “AI models that 
are known to be trained on copyrighted work without a 
license,” arguing that the sale would implicate Christie’s 
in “AI companies’ mass theft of human artists’ work.”55 
Composer Ed Newton-Rex, CEO of the nonprofit Fairly 
Trained, wrote on X that “at least nine or so” of the 
pieces likely relied on copyrighted data.56 Despite the 
protests, the auction went forward, with total sales of 
$728,784.57
Facing economic precarity, many artists are exper-
imenting with AI as a means of survival or innovation, 
while others remain deeply skeptical. “There’s this  
asteroid that’s coming to hit us,” Meade warns. “Some 
people are paying attention, some people aren’t, but 
it’s still going to come whether you like it or not.” With 
more creatives per capita than any other city, New 
York is uniquely poised to benefit from AI’s possibili -
ties—but also especially vulnerable to the disruptions 
it brings. It represents one of the most profound shifts 
in the city’s cultural landscape in decades, and its full 
ramifications are only beginning to come into view.
38
Counting the Uncounted
While New York City is home to more than 129,129 working artists, this figure doesn’t reflect the full breadth 
of the city’s arts community. Many artists are unable to financially sustain themselves through their creative 
work alone and instead rely on day jobs or seasonal employment to make ends meet. 
“At least 90 percent of the artists we work with are not making the majority of their living on arts,” says 
Pete Rushefsky, executive director of the Center for Traditional Music and Dance, a nonprofit that supports 
performing arts traditions in immigrant communities. “But I wouldn’t call them hobbyists. These are serious, 
serious artists.”
These artists—those who do not make the majority of their income through their artistic practice—aren’t 
counted under the Census label of artist and do not appear in the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) artist  
occupation category. In practice, this means that Census and BLS data offer a distorted picture of New York 
City’s artists—one that overstates Manhattan residency and greatly exaggerates how white and high-income 
the artist community is compared with reality. 
While New York artists have always had to take day jobs to make ends meet—the playwright who’s also a 
bartender, the photographer who’s also a delivery driver—our research suggests that more than ever before, 
the uncounted artist population exceeds the number of counted artists. The pandemic and the city’s rising 
unaffordability have only widened this gap.
The pandemic destabilizes the careers of many full-time artists, pushing some to stop making art full-time 
and to find other jobs to support themselves. Yawuza, a choreographer from Ghana, is one of New York City’s 
newly uncounted artists, passionately creating art in the face of the city’s challenges. Before the pandemic, he 
worked nearly full-time as the founder of the African dance group the Wuza Wuza Ensemble, booking  
performances twice a week and even going on tour around the state. Now, he only books gigs once a month 
or once every few months. Months behind on rent, affordability is a huge barrier to sustaining a full-time 
artistic career. “I had to go and find other jobs . . . I have no choice,” he says.
Those jobs, while they help keep the lights on, leave artists like Yawuza physically worn out and with fewer 
hours to work on their craft. He currently works as a security guard, standing on his feet for hours a day. Willie, 
a musician specializing in Afro-Venezuelan drumming and the director of the musical group Tambor y Caña, 
spends hours in the blazing sun in the summer as a lifeguard and sometimes sells art on the street, when not 
being the primary caregiver for his child. 
“Dancers are constantly grinding to find ways to survive in New York City while keeping their creative 
practice alive,” says Karesia Batan, founder of the Queensboro Arts Festival. “They are gig workers, freelancers 
with sometimes four or five jobs at once, or have fulltime positions in a completely different sector and can 
only dance in their off time.”
On top of juggling multiple jobs, many artists are on their own when it comes to managing their artistic 
practice and paying for space. During the cold winter months, when rehearsing outdoors is no longer an option, 
Willie pays $25 to $30 per hour to rent a practice space for his band of 15 to 20 people—a cost he absorbs 
almost entirely himself. Yawuza pays nearly $200 a month for a small 10x5 storage space for his instruments.
Yawuza and Willie make it clear that they don’t want to just survive in New York City but to be active 
contributors to its arts and culture sector. “New York City’s exciting art scene is what makes it attractive to 
the rest of the world,” Yawuza says. “We want to be part of that.”
While the city’s uncounted artists aren’t represented as artists in data from the Census or the  
Bureau of Labor Statistics, they are vital to the city’s creative ecosystem. They are more racially, geographically, 
and economically diverse than the artists reflected in federal datasets, meaning that traditional data sources 
are missing huge swaths of the city’s true cultural community.
39
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
Section 7: Creating a More Inclusive  
Creative Economy and Arts Sector
ALTHOUGH NEW YORK CITY’S CREATIVE ECONOMY  
has become a vital source of middle-wage jobs over 
the past two decades, the sector still has a long way to 
go before it reflects the diversity of the city—and to 
close glaring wage disparities.
Overall, this report finds that white workers make 
up 61.5 percent of creative industry jobs, compared 
with 14.1 percent Hispanic, 11.8 percent Black, and 
11.8 percent Asian workers. 58 This stands in sharp 
contrast to the city’s overall workforce, which is 37.7 
percent white, 26.6 percent Hispanic, 21.4 percent 
Black, and 15.3 percent Asian.
Across nearly all creative fields, New Yorkers of 
color remain underrepresented. In the least diverse 
field—performing arts—just 5.9 percent of workers  
are Asian, 11.1 percent are Black, and 14.2 percent 
are Hispanic, compared with 70.5 percent white. In 
film and television, 8 percent of workers are Asian,  
11.7 percent Black, 15.3 percent Hispanic, and 65.2 
percent white. In advertising, only 9.3 percent of work-
ers are Black, 13.4 percent Hispanic, 13.5 percent 
Asian, and 62.2 percent white. In architecture, the 
workforce remains 58.7 percent white. Only the visual 
arts industry approaches the city’s demographic mix, 
with 44 percent white, 24.3 percent Hispanic, 23.6 
percent Black, and 9 percent Asian workers.
Despite numerous diversity pledges over the 
years, the overall racial makeup of the creative indus-
tries has barely changed in a decade. The share of 
Black workers in the creative sector actually declined 
by 1.9 percentage points from 2013 to 2023, while 
the share of Hispanic and Asian workers rose by only 
0.7 and 1.8 points, respectively. (In the creative sectors, 
as in the economy overall, workers who identify as 
multiracial have notably increased.) A few industries 
bucked this trend—music production saw a 7.3 per -
centage point increase in Black workers, and Hispanic 
representation in architecture rose 3.6 points—but in 
most fields, the gaps remain entrenched.
These inequities extend beyond representation to 
pay. The median wage for white creative workers 
($82,592) is 34.6 percent higher than for Black workers, 
27.1 percent higher than for Hispanic workers, and 7.3 
percent higher than for Asian workers. In architecture, 
DCLA's budget nearly doubles over the last decade 
 
CDF 's budget shown here is from FY24, the most recent data available 
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs.  
Created with Datawrapper

40
white workers earn $87,465—nearly 50 percent more 
than Black workers and 21.5 percent more than  
Hispanic workers. In advertising, the median white 
worker earns $104,125, 39 percent higher than Black 
workers and 28 percent higher than Hispanic workers. 
In publishing, white workers earn $81,036, 31 percent 
higher than Black peers and 20 percent higher than 
Hispanic peers.
Artists of color living in financial precarity
New York’s arts scene may be unmatched in scope 
and vitality, but its artists remain far less diverse than 
the city itself. Among full- and part-time artists, 67 per-
cent are white, compared with 11.6 percent Hispanic, 
10.3 percent Black, and 8.5 percent Asian.
White workers make up at least half of every artistic 
discipline. The least diverse include music directors 
and composers (77.5 percent white), editors (75  
percent), and writers and authors (73.3 percent).
Artists of color also face stark wage inequities in 
an already low-paying field. White artists earn an  
average of $61,121—37.1 percent more than nonwhite 
artists, who earn just $44,586 on average. These gaps 
persist across nearly every discipline:
  White dancers and choreographers earn  
43 percent more than their nonwhite peers.
  White producers and directors  
earn 34.3 percent more.
  White photographers earn 33.4 percent more.
  White musicians and singers  
earn 30.2 percent more.
  White writers and authors  
 earn 28.4 percent more.
  White editors earn 16.5 percent more.
Top-paying creative careers also tend to be the least 
diverse. Producers and directors, with mean earnings 
of $87,363, are 70.3 percent white; editors, earning 
$77,110, are 75 percent white. In contrast, DJs, one 
of the most racially diverse occupations (22.6 percent 
Black, 28.5 percent Hispanic), earn just $16,792  
on average. Dancers, too, show greater diversity  
(26 percent Black, 16.6 percent Hispanic) yet earn  
a modest $38,644.
BIPOC-led arts organizations have faced renewed 
challenges since the pandemic
Artists of color are not the only ones facing inequities. 
Arts organizations led by and serving BIPOC communities 
continue to struggle disproportionately—with smaller 
budgets, fewer resources, and deeper pandemic losses.
A 2021 CUF analysis of 643 community-based 
arts organizations, using data from Americans for the 
Arts, found that in lower-income NYC ZIP codes—where 
most organizations are BIPOC-led—one in four lost  
access to their sole physical space during the pandemic, 
compared with just 12 percent of organizations in 
higher-income areas.59
Smaller organizations, often operating with limited 
reserves and without endowments, remain especially 
vulnerable. “A lot of the organizations that are rooted 
in communities of color and run by people of color are 
working with smaller budgets,” says Pia Agrawal,  
former executive director of Staten Island Arts and 
current executive director of the Leeway Foundation. 
“If an organization’s budget is $100,000 a year, for 
example, and they don't get $40,000 in grants they 
were relying on, it could shut an organization down. 
Without any longer-term financial commitment… [you 
lose] that ability to plan for the future.”
As Museum Hue’s Brown Paper  notes, these  
organizations are vital cultural anchors in their neigh-
borhoods—yet most operate without the stability of 
owning their own spaces—contributing to vulnerability 
in times of crisis like the pandemic, or when rents rise 
quickly. The report finds that the majority of POC-led 
arts entities in New York City rent space, operate  
online, or work from home offices, “often out of  
necessity, not choice,” limiting their ability to build 
long-term roots in the communities they serve.60
41
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
Section 8: Progress in New York City Arts 
and Culture Policy: A Ten-Year Snapshot
Boosts in Funding for DCLA, CDF, and CIG
New York City has the largest cultural affairs budget in 
the country, with the city’s Department of Cultural  
Affairs (DCLA) having more funds at its disposal than 
even the National Endowment for the Arts. And over the 
past decade—since the publication of the 2015 edition 
of our Creative New York report, the city has poured 
substantially more funding into the agency while estab-
lishing new programs focused on diversity and space.
Both DCLA and the Cultural Development Fund 
(CDF) have seen significant increases in funding. From 
FY15 to FY26, DCLA’s budget rose by 89.8 percent 
(48 percent after adjusting for inflation). 61 Funding  
for the CDF—which provides more than 1,000 grants 
each year to cultural nonprofits and nonprofits that  
incorporate culture into their mission—has also grown 
substantially, by 45.7 percent from FY15 to FY24 
(13.6 percent in inflation-adjusted dollars). 62 The 
number of CDF grants awarded annually increased 
16.8 percent, and the median award amount more 
than doubled, rising 110 percent from FY15 to FY24 
(63.8 percent in inflation-adjusted dollars).
In FY23, DCLA undertook a series of reforms to 
make the CDF application and award process more 
equitable. Changes included raising the minimum 
award amount from $5,000 to $10,000 and revising 
application criteria to elevate organizations in margin-
alized communities.63 In the first year they were imple-
mented, organizations with smaller operating budgets 
saw a notable increase in their award size, and  
a majority of POC-led or POC-founded organizations  
received higher baseline awards.64
The Cultural Institutions Group (CIG)—a coalition 
of 39 cultural organizations operating in city-owned 
facilities and on parkland—saw a more modest  
increase. CIG operational funding noticeably declined 
when adjusted for inflation from FY15 to FY24, but 
has now rebounded by 40 percent (9.1 percent in  
inflation-adjusted dollars) from FY15 to FY25. 65  
Visitors to CIG institutions have surpassed pre-pan -
demic levels, increasing 21 percent from FY15 (21.6 
million) to FY24 (26.1 million). Six new institutions 
were invited to join the CIG in recent years, including 
the Weeksville Heritage Center in 2020 and BRIC, 
the Bronx Children’s Museum, the Louis Armstrong 
House Museum, the Noble Maritime Collection, and 
Pregones/Puerto Rican Traveling Theater in 2025. 66
City Programs: A Focus on Space and Diversity
Over the past decade, New York City has launched  
a series of ambitious initiatives to strengthen its 
creative ecosystem—expanding access to space, 
deepening equity, and better integrating the arts 
into city government.
In 2017, New York City released its first-ever cultural 
plan, CreateNYC, which surveyed the city’s arts and 
culture landscape and identified key needs and priori-
ties. The plan laid critical groundwork for many of the 
policies and investments that followed, although its 
enormous breadth made it difficult for city officials to 
prioritize among issues—and too many elements were 
left to DCLA to manage without sufficient funding or 
leadership from City Hall.67
The city has long recognized that access to afford-
able, stable space remains one of the biggest challenges 
facing artists and cultural organizations. Launched by 
DCLA and NYCEDC in 2018, the Affordable Real Estate 
for Artists (AREA) initiative was conceived to seed new 
affordable artist housing and workspaces in city-owned 
buildings. The city issued an RFEI and set aside capital 
to advance projects, but progress has been far slower 
than envisioned, with none of the promised housing 
units delivered and only a portion of the 500 planned 
workspaces materializing.
That same year, the city established the Mayor’s 
Office of Nightlife, following in the footsteps of cities 
like Berlin and Paris. The office serves as a vital hub of 
support and resources for nightlife businesses, which 
contribute nearly 300,000 jobs and $35 billion in  
annual economic impact.68 It helps maintain productive 
relationships between venues and surrounding  
communities while working to streamline permitting 
and improve safety
42
In the wake of the pandemic, the city took innova-
tive steps to shore up vulnerable cultural organizations 
and strengthen the arts sector. To support artists hit 
hardest by the pandemic, DCLA launched City Artist 
Corps (CAC) in 2021, a $25 million initiative that  
provided 3,000 grants of $5,000 each to working  
artists.69 The program funded community workshops, 
performances, and exhibitions in every borough, while 
also supporting artists who created murals in public 
schools, artworks in NYCHA developments, and instal-
lations for the citywide People’s Festival.
NYC Create in Place, launched in 2024, coordi -
nates interagency support for creative space retention, 
provides one-on-one casework for organizations at risk 
of displacement, and maintains a centralized online hub 
of technical and financial resources. The initiative has 
been effective in mobilizing agency support, including 
help from the Department of Small Business Services 
in response to a devastating fire in Red Hook that  
destroyed dozens of artists’ studios and archives. Early 
activity has demonstrated strong demand for its  
services—but meaningful impact will depend on securing 
dedicated funding to act on the space numerous chal-
lenges the program has surfaced.70
DCLA has also expanded programs that embed art-
ists directly into civic life. The Public Artists in Residence 
(PAIR) program, launched in 2015, pairs artists with 
city agencies to collaboratively design creative responses 
to public challenges.71 Artists receive $40,000 to work 
alongside agency staff for at least a year, developing 
projects that engage New Yorkers and reimagine how 
government interacts with the public.72
Other programs aim to activate public space 
through art. City Canvas, launched in partnership with 
the Department of Buildings, allows property owners 
to transform construction sheds and scaffolding with 
temporary art installations. The program provides a 
pathway for artists to secure paid commissions while 
brightening the city’s streetscape.73
DCLA has also invested in programs designed to 
diversify the city’s cultural workforce. The CUNY Cultural 
Corps, launched in 2016 with Rockefeller Foundation 
support, connects CUNY students—among the most  
diverse higher education populations in the country—
with paid internships at nearly 90 cultural organizations.74 
In FY20, it became a permanent line item in the DCLA 
budget.75 For mid-career professionals, the CreateNYC 
Leadership Accelerator provided professional develop-
ment and networking opportunities for emerging leaders 
from underrepresented backgrounds.
At the state level, policymakers have begun  
integrating artists more directly into government and  
economic development. The FY25 state budget allocated 
$500,000 to launch the first-ever artist residency  
program within state agencies. That same year, the 
state’s Regional Economic Development Councils 
dedicated a record 10 percent of all funding to arts 
and culture projects—up from just 3.7 percent in 
2021—reflecting growing recognition of the sector’s 
role in driving inclusive economic growth. 76
Bronx Arts Ensemble Strings (Jorge Ávila, Violin; Evelyn Petcher Brandes, violin; Eliot Bailen, cello; Sally Shumway, viola). Photo by Hector Olivieri
43
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
Section 9: Beyond DCLA: Cross-Agency 
Opportunities to Support the Arts 
EVEN THOUGH NEW YORK CITY HAS INVESTED MORE 
in the arts since 2015, it doesn’t always feel like it. 
The number of arts organizations has surged across 
the five boroughs, stretching funding thinner than 
ever, and many individual artists and cultural nonprof-
its have yet to fully recover from the pandemic. With 
DCLA representing just 0.26 percent of the city’s 
$116 billion budget, the agency’s resources alone 
can’t ensure a sustainable rebound for the arts—or 
the vitality of the city’s creative economy. Supporting 
artists and cultural organizations will require a broader, 
cross-agency commitment that embeds arts policy 
across the fabric of city government.
NYC DOT Arts: Getting Art Out  
of Galleries and Into the Streets
NYC DOT’s Arts Program plays a crucial role in bringing 
art out of museums and into the public realm—trans -
forming sidewalks, plazas, archways, and other urban 
structures into canvases. The agency runs several  
programs that commission temporary and permanent 
public artworks across all five boroughs, often in  
partnership with community-based organizations 
(CBOs) and business improvement districts (BIDs). 
Through its NYC DOT Art Partners program, local 
groups can collaborate with artists to create tempo -
rary installations on DOT-approved sites, helping bring 
more color and creativity to the city’s streets.
Since 2015, NYC DOT Arts Partners has helped 
realize more than 190 installations citywide, according 
to data shared by DOT on NYCOpenData. Yet access 
remains uneven. A disproportionate number of projects 
have clustered in wealthier, better-resourced neigh -
borhoods like Downtown Brooklyn and Fort Greene 
(49 installations), Midtown and Flatiron (46), and the 
Financial District and Greenwich Village (22). Mean -
while, areas such as Jackson Heights and East Elmhurst 
have seen just one, and Staten Island only two, over 
the same period.
The program’s lengthy and complex application 
process has also proven a barrier for many groups. “If 
you’re coming at it for the first time, it’s really hard; 
and it creates a lot of barriers to actually get these 
projects done,” says one leader of an organization 
that manages public space. Applicants often face a 
90-day window between submission and installation, 
multiple rounds of agency review, and overlapping per-
mitting requirements that deter smaller organizations.
Funding is another challenge. NYC DOT Art Part -
ners does not provide financial support to community 
partners, leaving them to cover costs such as artist 
fees, insurance, and staffing. “It’s just so expensive to 
bring these installations to New York City. It costs tens 
of thousands of dollars per installation. Funding  
support would be great,” says the leader of the organi-
zation that manages public space. Well-resourced 
BIDs find the process costly, and smaller groups  
with limited capacity are effectively shut out. Easing  
administrative burdens and dedicating matching 
funds could help expand the program’s reach to more 
neighborhoods across the city.
Public Art in NYC Parks:  
Expanding the City’s Open-Air Museum
NYC Parks manages what is arguably New York’s largest 
art gallery: more than 800 permanent monuments, 
including 250 sculptures, plus roughly 150 temporary 
art installations on view each year. 77 These range  
from murals painted on basketball courts to fiber 
sculptures installed in meadows and plazas—like the 
Richmond Hill Art Hub in Lieutenant Frank McConnell 
Park, which doubles as a stage, seating area, and little 
free library.
Despite its scale, the temporary public art program 
—largely responsive to applications for art installations 
from individual artists, museums, galleries, nonprofits 
—operates with only two full-time staff members  
responsible for reviewing applications, ensuring  
44
safety compliance, and coordinating logistics. Their 
dedication has helped Parks increase temporary  
exhibitions by 76.5 percent since 2015 78, but the 
department lacks the capacity and resources to 
proactively commission new work— especially outside 
Manhattan, which hosts an average of 76 installations 
per year and is the borough most often preferred by 
applicants, compared to 29 in Brooklyn, 27 in Queens, 
10 in the Bronx, and just three in Staten Island.
Bringing art to more communities will require  
additional investment. “I think we would like to do 
more to support emerging artists… or artists who 
don’t have access to certain levels of funding,” says 
Elizabeth Masella, senior public art coordinator at NYC 
Parks. “I think having the funding would entice artists 
to maybe think about those neighborhoods or give  
artists who may not otherwise have the opportunity 
the [chance] to do these types of things.” Insurance 
costs—typically $1,200 to $2,000 per project—also  
remain a major barrier for individual artists.
Beyond sculpture and installations, NYC Parks 
oversees dozens of amphitheaters and bandshells 
that host musical performances but are vastly  
underutilized. The Seuffert Bandshell in Forest Park, 
for example, hosts only six summer concerts per 
year—four of them tribute acts. Expanding program -
ming at these public venues could bring new cultural 
life to parks citywide and help make the arts a more 
regular feature of neighborhood life.79
NYCEDC: Boosting Support for Individual Artists
As the city’s main economic development agency,  
NYCEDC plays a critical role in shaping the future of 
New York’s creative economy. While not an arts agency, 
NYCEDC’s investments in cultural infrastructure—from 
soundstages to studio space—help sustain the indus -
tries that make New York a global creative capital.  
In recent years, NYCEDC has supported the film and 
television industry, digital gaming, and fashion through 
initiatives like the Game Design Future Lab and the 
development of MADE Bush Terminal, which will house 
space for artisans and workforce programs in the  
entertainment sector.
NYCEDC also oversees major capital projects for 
cultural institutions, such as the renovation of The 
Bronx Museum, and helped deliver 26 artist studios 
through the Spofford Redevelopment Project. Yet to 
truly keep artists in New York, NYCEDC will need to 
expand its focus on individual creative workers—espe-
cially when it comes to space.
Through the Affordable Real Estate for Artists 
(AREA) initiative, NYCEDC and DCLA once set a goal of 
developing 500 artist studios and 1,500 affordable 
housing units for cultural workers by 2025. While the 
program delivered 50,000 square feet of affordable 
studio space at the Brooklyn Army Terminal and 293 
individual studio spaces, it fell short of its ambitious 
targets.80 Future NYCEDC-led redevelopment projects—
like the ongoing transformation of Gansevoort Square, 
which will include 600 housing units, half of them  
affordable—could help correct that. 81 Designating a 
portion of those affordable apartments as artist housing 
would both honor the area’s creative legacy and ensure 
that artists can continue to live and work in the neigh-
borhoods that define the city’s cultural identity.
EDC has also experimented with integrating artists 
directly into its work. In 2017, it hosted three Artists in 
Residence who collaborated with residents of Hunts Point 
and the South Bronx on climate resiliency projects. 82 
Replicating this model across more NYCEDC initiatives 
could bring new perspectives to urban design, deepen 
community engagement, and infuse creativity into the 
agency’s public projects. NYCEDC could also strengthen 
its commitment by dedicating one percent of all 
capital spending to public art—making the existing 
“Percent for Art” program the gold standard across all 
NYCEDC-managed capital projects.
PAIR Program: Artists Inside City Agencies
The Department of Cultural Affairs’ Public Artists in 
Residence (PAIR) program demonstrates how embed-
ding artists within city agencies can generate public 
value well beyond the arts sector.83 Launched in 2015 
and inspired by artist Mierle Laderman Ukeles’s de -
cades-long residency at the Department of Sanitation, 
PAIR has placed 27 artists across 20 city agencies.84
Residents receive $40,000 and desk space to collabo-
rate with public servants for at least one year on civic 
challenges, engaging communities through creativity.
Recent PAIR projects have reimagined public archives, 
illuminated hidden histories, and fostered civic pride. 
Brooklyn-based artist Kameron Neal, who completed 
his residency with the Department of Records and  
Information Services, created Down the Barrel (of a 
Lens)—a video installation built from digitized NYPD 
surveillance films that examined policing in New York 
between the 1960s and 1980s. After debuting at the 
Brooklyn Army Terminal in 2023, it went on view at 
Lincoln Center.
45
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
Other PAIR projects have tackled timely social  
issues. Artist Amanda Phingbodhipakkiya, working 
with the Commission on Human Rights, launched a 
powerful public art campaign confronting anti-Asian 
hate during the pandemic, displayed on bus shelters 
and subway stations citywide. Artist sTo Len, in  
residence at the Department of Sanitation, invited 
New Yorkers to reconsider their relationship to waste 
through workshops and participatory art.
Now entering its second decade, PAIR remains 
one of the most inventive cross-agency arts programs 
in the country—but it could grow even further.  
Major agencies like Buildings, City Planning, Housing  
Preservation and Development, and Youth and  
Community Development have never hosted a  
resident, yet their work shapes New Yorkers’ daily 
lives. Embedding artists there could spark new  
forms of civic engagement and help reimagine how 
government connects with residents.
To fully harness the potential of this model, the city 
could create permanent, full-time artist-in-residence 
positions within select agencies—allowing artists’  
insights to take root and generate long-term impact. 
These creative collaborations show that when city  
government makes space for art, it makes space for 
innovation, empathy, and community at every level.
Courtesy of the American Dance Festival Travelogue (1977), Performers: Catherine Kirk, Savannah Gaillard, Jennifer Payán, Burr Johnson, 
Claude CJ Johnson, Ashley Merker, Spencer Weidi; Photo by © Ben McKeown
46
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
WITHOUT BOLD, COORDINATED ACTION FROM CITY AND STATE POLICYMAKERS, THE CITY RISKS LOSING THE  
artists, organizations, and creative businesses that help power its economy and define its identity. The following 
series of recommendations will ensure artists not just survive but thrive in New York City over the next decade.
1. Make New York more affordable—for artists and everyone
The single most effective step city and state leaders can take to sustain New York’s creative sector is to tackle 
the affordability crisis head-on. Soaring housing costs have made it nearly impossible for many artists and cre-
ative professionals to live and work here. Reversing this trend will require a massive increase in housing produc-
tion citywide—including deeply affordable, workforce, and middle-income units—paired with reforms to unlock 
more supply in every borough. The City of Yes for Housing Opportunity is an important step forward, but far more 
will be needed to meaningfully expand the city’s housing supply. Policymakers should build on City of Yes by 
extending as-of-right zoning to more transit-rich areas, fully eliminating remaining parking minimums, streamlin-
ing permitting and environmental review processes that continue to delay projects, legalizing accessory dwell -
ings more broadly across low-rise neighborhoods, expanding opportunities for small-site and missing-middle 
infill, establishing a viable financing framework to support new rental housing production, and strengthening 
preservation tools to stabilize the city’s existing affordable housing stock. Without these changes, ambitious 
new housing targets will fall short—and New York risks losing the creative core that powers its economy and 
civic life.
2. Create 5,000 artist-preference housing units by 2030
New York City has fallen behind the rest of the state—and the nation—when it comes to developing affordable 
housing for artists. To reverse this, the city should commit to building or designating 5,000 artist-preference 
units by 2030, achieved through modest set-asides in citywide affordable housing projects, prioritized on public 
land and in mixed-income developments. HPD should issue clear guidance on artist-preference policy modeled 
on state standards to ensure equitable, transparent implementation. The city should also create a biennial NYC 
Artist Survey and dashboard to collect better data on artists’ housing and space needs. In parallel, policymakers 
should develop a citywide “Artist Live/Work Standard” that establishes zoning and code models for safe,  
practical mixed-use housing. Artist-preference units should also be incorporated into office-to-residential  
conversions, and a new Artist Housing Accelerator should help fund early-stage costs for projects serving this 
vital but vulnerable workforce.
Section 10: Policy Recommendations
47
3. Launch NYC’s first five-borough cultural festival
New York is home to a rich array of annual cultural events—from Lunar New Year celebrations and the West  
Indian Day Parade to the Tribeca Film Festival and the Armory Show. But the city still lacks a signature, citywide 
festival on the scale of Austin’s SXSW, the Venice Biennale, or the Edinburgh Fringe, which generates more than 
3 million ticket sales and $630 million in economic impact for a much smaller city. A Five Borough Cultural  
Festival—coordinated by the city and designed to build on and amplify the many festivals and programs already 
happening throughout the year—would give residents and visitors a powerful new reason to explore the city’s 
creative landscape.
With strong mayoral leadership, the festival would enlist hundreds of venues and organizations across all five 
boroughs and open streets, plazas, parks, historic buildings, and city-owned properties for music, dance, 
theater, visual art, open studios, and immersive experiences—while significantly easing red tape for outdoor 
cultural programming. The first iteration need not be prohibitively complex; simply identifying a week in the 
calendar, rallying existing partners, and putting the mayor’s support behind a unified cultural moment  
could go a long way toward making this a reality. Over time, sponsorships, ticketed events, and festival passes 
could offset much of the cost, while the city focuses on coordination, access to public space, streamlined 
permitting, and resilience planning.
4. Launch a portable benefits pilot for freelancers and self-employed artists
Nearly one-third of New York’s creative workers are freelancers, independent contractors, or self-employed—and 
they’re part of a rapidly growing independent workforce citywide. Yet most lack access to the basic safety nets 
that full-time employees rely on: health insurance subsidies, paid leave, retirement savings, and unemployment 
support. To make creative work more sustainable and address deep inequities facing creative workers of color, 
the next mayor should launch a portable benefits system that allows independent workers to accrue and keep 
essential benefits as they move between gigs, employers, or sectors. Rather than building a new public agency, 
the city should partner with a trusted nonprofit like Freelancers Union to administer portable accounts, with 
proportional contributions from employers, platforms, and public funding.
A streamlined, universally accessible portable benefits system would reduce economic precarity across the arts 
while strengthening the broader freelance and gig workforce. Benefits should follow the worker—not the job—
and include options such as health-insurance subsidies, paid leave, and retirement savings. By pooling  
contributions and simplifying enrollment, New York can ensure that independent workers receive meaningful, 
durable support without adding administrative burdens. This approach would help stabilize creative careers, 
boost equity, and keep more artists and freelancers in the city for the long term.
48
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
5. Establish a pooled insurance program for venues and cultural nonprofits
Insurance costs have become one of the most punishing—and destabilizing—expenses facing New York City’s 
arts organizations and small venues, with premiums doubling or tripling since the pandemic. To prevent further 
closures, the next mayor should launch a city-facilitated pooled insurance program that allows cultural organizations 
to access affordable coverage through collective purchasing power. The city should partner with NYCEDC or SBS 
and a trusted nonprofit intermediary to negotiate discounted group rates for liability, property, event, and venue 
insurance, with additional subsidies for organizations under $1 million in annual revenue.
The pooled program could function similarly to group health purchasing alliances: organizations join voluntarily, 
the city helps secure better prices and stronger underwriting, and a nonprofit administrator handles enrollment 
and compliance. Over time, the city should commission a feasibility study on establishing a captive insurance 
entity or risk retention mechanism specifically for the arts and nightlife sector—creating a long-term, self-sustaining 
solution. In the near term, however, a collective purchasing pool would provide immediate relief, freeing up 
scarce organizational dollars for programming, staff, and community engagement—and helping small venues 
survive in every borough
6. Help cultural organizations build long-term stability  
and increase flexibility
For many small and mid-sized arts organizations, the rising cost of space has become a fundamental barrier to 
stability. While ownership is not the right solution for every group—particularly those without the balance sheet, 
staffing capacity, or financial cushion to manage a building—preserving existing cultural spaces and supporting the 
subset of organizations that are prepared to take on ownership can be essential to ensuring long-term community 
cultural assets. The city and state should launch a Cultural Ownership Fund focused on helping mission-driven 
cultural organizations retain space already in the sector and supporting those with the capacity to responsibly  
acquire or co-locate in permanent homes, with priority for groups rooted in lower-income communities.
At the same time, any ownership strategy must be paired with policies that help organizations keep their  
operations strong and adaptable. This includes scaling shared back-office services—such as accounting, payroll, 
HR, and benefits—by expanding cooperative models like ArtsPool, and supporting shared-space arrangements 
that allow multiple organizations to co-locate, program jointly, or share rehearsal, performance, and fabrication 
facilities. Flexibility is just as important as stability, which is why the city should also reform its overly cumbersome 
Temporary Place of Assembly permitting process so that arts and culture producers can more easily activate 
unused spaces for performances, exhibitions, and concerts.
49
7. Scale up NYCEDC’s support for the creative economy
NYCEDC already plays a role in supporting the city’s creative economy, but its focus and resources remain far 
smaller than those devoted to sectors like life sciences, green tech, or manufacturing. To meet the scale of  
the challenge, NYCEDC should elevate and expand its Creative Industries work into a core pillar of the  
agency’s economic strategy, on par with other growth sectors. That means dedicating new staff and funding to 
coordinate investments across design, advertising, music, fashion, and film; embedding creative industry goals 
in every NYCEDC capital project; and integrating creative workforce development into the agency’s training  
and entrepreneurship programs.
NYCEDC should commit to dedicating at least 1 percent of capital budgets to public art or creative placemaking in 
every capital project—building on the existing Percent for Art law but applying it more consistently and intentionally 
across EDC-managed developments. By involving artists much earlier in the design process, EDC can  
move beyond end-stage murals or sculptures and integrate creative elements from the start, from outdoor  
performance spaces to artist work areas or artist-designed architectural features, ensuring capital investments 
strengthen the city’s cultural vitality. The agency should also expand shared production hubs for music,  
podcasting, and small creative businesses and launch signature initiatives such as Independent Film Week  
and a global NYC Music Summit to cement the city’s standing as a creative capital. At the same time, NYCEDC 
should partner with industry leaders to stabilize struggling sectors—including advertising, design, and film—
through business incubators, export assistance, and targeted workspace incentives.
8. Embed artists across city government
New York’s Public Artists in Residence (PAIR) program has already shown the power of integrating artists into 
city agencies—but its reach remains limited, touching only a small share of the government. The next mayor 
should expand PAIR tenfold and create full-time civic artist positions embedded within high-impact agencies such 
as Housing Preservation and Development (HPD), Transportation (DOT), Youth and Community Development 
(DYCD), City Planning (DCP), and Buildings (DOB)—none of which have ever hosted a PAIR artist, despite their 
central role in shaping daily life. Each agency should develop a “+Art” initiative—DOT + Art, Parks + Art, Hospitals 
+ Art—pairing artists with public servants to co-design creative projects, community engagement campaigns, 
and civic improvements.
These collaborations can transform everyday infrastructure into platforms for expression, from installations in 
civic buildings to youth engagement programs, public-space activations, and community-building cultural 
events. Embedding artists across these agencies would strengthen trust between residents and government, 
make civic spaces more welcoming, and help address complex challenges with new creative tools. Expanding 
PAIR beyond the handful of agencies that have participated to date would signal that creativity is a core city 
function—not an afterthought—and weave the arts more fully into urban problem-solving.
50
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
9. Generate dedicated, recurring revenue for the arts
Even with steadily increasing cultural budgets, the city’s arts ecosystem remains vulnerable to fiscal swings—  
including federal funding cuts—even as the number of cultural nonprofits has surged over the past decade. To 
improve stability, policymakers should establish recurring revenue streams dedicated to arts and culture. One 
approach is a voluntary surcharge on overnight hotel stays with proceeds directed to a “Parks and Culture Fund” 
supporting both public art and recreation. The city could also pilot designated Cultural Districts, funded through 
modest assessments on nearby property owners, to sustain programming and maintenance in key cultural  
corridors. Together, these mechanisms would ensure predictable funding for the arts while aligning investment 
with the tourism, development, and quality-of-life benefits that culture generates citywide.
In addition to generating new revenue, the city should make its existing public funding more reliable and equitable. 
The mayor should prioritize reforms to the Department of Cultural Affairs’ Cultural Development Fund to ensure 
timely payments, transparent reporting, and more stable multiyear operating support for midsized cultural  
organizations. Establishing a new tier of “Cultural Organizations Group” grantees—between the major Cultural 
Institutions Group and smaller nonprofits—would provide predictable funding to hundreds of midsized organizations 
that anchor local creative ecosystems but currently face chronic instability.
10. Launch a Creative Pathways Initiative across NYC public schools  
and CUNY
New York City’s creative economy does not reflect the diversity of the city—and without deliberate action, those 
inequities will remain. To ensure that far more New Yorkers can access the well-paying careers in design, film 
and TV, advertising, creative tech, performing arts, and cultural management, city leaders should launch a  
Creative Pathways and Talent Pipeline Initiative spanning NYC Public Schools and CUNY. At the K–12 level, the 
next administration should make the creative economy the next major focus of FutureReadyNYC, building on the 
initiative’s progress in business, technology, healthcare, and education. This should include establishing Creative 
Schools NYC, a new effort to guarantee meaningful, sequential arts and creative-skills learning in every grade 
band; expanding highly effective but small-scale nonprofit programs; integrating creative occupations into the 
city’s youth apprenticeship efforts; and increasing creative-sector participation in the Summer Youth Employment 
Program. A centralized employer-matching effort—guided by a new creative-sector advisory council—would help 
ensure that work-based learning opportunities reach far more schools and students. At the postsecondary and 
early-career level, the city should establish a Creative Economy Talent Pipeline that connects CUNY students 
and adult learners with paid internships, mentorship, and clear routes into a full range of creative careers—
building on and going beyond the CUNY Cultural Corps, which is exclusively focused on nonprofit arts. This effort 
should replicate the success of CUNY 2X Tech through a CUNY 2X Creative initiative, designed to bring career 
exploration, mentorship, and industry expertise to CUNY students interested in creative careers.
51
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
Endnotes
1. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of data from  
Lightcast using the “Resident Worker” metric, accessed 
October 17, 2025.
2. Claire Cain Miller, “Americans Are Staying Home More.  
The Economy Isn’t the Same,” New York Times,  
October 5, 2024, https://www.nytimes.com/2024/10/05/
upshot/americans-homebodies-alone-census.html.
3. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of data from the  
2023 American Community Survey 5-year estimates, 
defining artists as SOC 27-1010 Artists and Related 
Workers, SOC 27-2010 Actors, Producers, and Directors, 
SOC 27-2030 Dancers and Choreographers, SOC 27-2040 
Musicians, Singers, and Related Workers, SOC 27-2091 
Disc Jockeys (Except Radio), SOC 27-3040 Writers and 
Editors, and SOC 27-4021 Photographers.
4. Urban Institute, National Center for Charitable  
Statistics (NCCS), “Nonprofit Sector in Brief Dashboard,”  
http://nccsweb.
5. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of data from Lightcast. 
Other cities defined by MSA boundaries.
6. Robin Pogrebin, “Guggenheim Lays Off Workers Amid 
Broader Cutbacks,” New York Times, February 28, 2025, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2025/02/28/arts/design/ 
guggenheim-layoffs.html; Robin Pogrebin, “Brooklyn  
Museum Announces Layoffs as Arts Institutions Face 
Strains,” New York Times, February 7, 2025,  
https://www.nytimes.com/2025/02/07/arts/design/
brooklyn-museum-layoffs.html.
7. Adjustment to Brooklyn’s cost of living based on the COL 
index from Lightcast, derived from annual C2ER data.
8. Jiayi Xu and Danielle Hale, New York City Rental Report 
2025 Q1: The Pricey Get Pricier—All New York City  
Boroughs Experienced Year-Over-Year Rent Growth  
(Realtor.com, 2025), https://www.realtor.com/research/
nyc-q1-2025-Rent/.
9. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of data from the  
2023 American Community Survey 5-year estimates, 
defining artists as SOC 27-1010 Artists and Related 
Workers, SOC 27-2010 Actors, Producers, and Directors, 
SOC 27-2030 Dancers and Choreographers, SOC 27-2040 
Musicians, Singers, and Related Workers, SOC 27-2091 
Disc Jockeys (Except Radio), SOC 27-3040 Writers and 
Editors, and SOC 27-4021 Photographers.
10. Julia Carmel, “Brooklyn’s Nightlife Scene Faces  
Closures,” New York Times, April 8, 2025,  
https://www.nytimes.com/2025/04/08/realestate/ 
brooklyn-closures-nightlife.html.
11. Office of the New York City Comptroller, “Nonprofit  
Nonpayment,” https://comptroller.nyc.gov/reports/ 
nonprofit-nonpayment/.
12. Jennifer Vanasco, “NYC Cultural Institutions Scrambling 
After Trump Admin Cuts Arts Funding,” Gothamist,  
https://gothamist.com/arts-entertainment/nyc-cultural- 
institutions-scrambling-after-trump-admin-guts-arts-funding.
13. Julie Watson, “U.S. Detention of European and Canadian 
Tourists Creates Fear over Traveling to America,” PBS  
NewsHour, March 21, 2025, https://www.pbs.org/ 
newshour/world/u-s-detention-of-european-and- 
canadian-tourists-creates-fear-over-traveling-to-america; 
Nia Decaille, “Hoping to Visit the U.S.? It Might Cost  
You an Extra $250,” New York Times, July 22, 2025, 
https://www.nytimes.com/2025/07/22/travel/visa- 
integrity-fee-trump-big-beautiful-bill.html.
14. Edison Research, “The Top 50 Podcasts in the U.S. for  
Q1 2025 from Edison Podcast Metrics,”  
https://www.edisonresearch.com/the-top-50-podcasts- 
in-the-u-s-for-q1-2025-from-edison-podcast-Metrics/.
15. Sarah Perez, “Spotify Layoffs Hit the Podcast  
Industry Hard,” TechCrunch, December 7, 2023,  
https://techcrunch.com/2023/12/07/spotify-layoffs- 
podcast-industry-fallout/.
16. Barron’s, “Scents and Sustainability: Candle  
Company Apotheke Is Sticking to Its Green Goals,”  
https://www.barrons.com/articles/scents-and- 
sustainabilitycandle-company-apotheke-is-stick-
ing-to-its-greengoals-57af5665.
17. QNS, “Queens Craft Brigade to Host 8th Anniversary  
Celebration in Astoria,” July 2025, https://qns.
com/2025/07/queens-craft-brigade-to-host-8th- 
anniversary-celebration-in-astoria/; Staten Island Advance, 
“Snug Harbor Launches Outdoor Festival ‘Cottage Row 
Curiosities,’” March 2021, https://www.silive.com/ 
entertainment/2021/03/snug-harbor-launches-outdoor- 
festival-artist-market-for-cottage-row-curiosities.html.
18. Influencity, “The Largest Influencer Study of the United 
States 2023,” https://influencity.com/resources/studies/
the-largest-influencer-study-of-the-united-states-2023/.
19. Rolling Stone, “Top Social Media Influencers and  
Creators 2025,” https://www.rollingstone.com/culture/
culture-lists/top-social-media-influencers- 
creators-2025-1235413251/.
20. Gothamist, “NYC Art Schools See Record-High  
Application Numbers as Gen Zers Clamber to Enroll,” 
https://gothamist.com/arts-entertainment/nyc-artschools-
see-record-high-application-numbers-as-gen-zersclamber-
to-enroll.
52
21. Data from American Community Survey, 2013 and 2023.
22. Median city income from American Community Survey, 
2022.
23. Chloe Veltman, “Sweeping Cuts Hit NEA after Trump  
Administration Calls to Eliminate the Agency,” NPR,  
May 3, 2025, https://www.npr.org/2025/05/03/ 
nx-s1-5385888/sweeping-cuts-hit-nea-after-trump- 
administration-calls-to-eliminate-the-agency; “Grant  
Announcement—FY 2025,” National Endowment for the 
Arts, January 10, 2025, https://www.arts.gov/sites/ 
default/files/Fall2024_StateListReport_UPDATED.pdf; 
Ryan Kailath, “NYC Arts Groups Face ‘Existential’  
Challenge with Trump Cuts to Federal Funding,” Gothamist, 
May 16, 2025, https://gothamist.com/arts-entertainment/
nyc-arts-groups-face-existential-challenge-with-trump-cuts-
to-federal-funding.
24. Kailath, “NYC Arts Groups Face ‘Existential’ Challenge  
with Trump Cuts to Federal Funding.”
25. Samantha Maldonado, “NYC’s Arts World Reels  
from Trump NEA Grant Cuts,” The City, May 8, 2025, 
https://www.thecity.nyc/2025/05/08/arts-budget-cuts-
nea-trump-funds-theater-dance/.
26. Kailath, “NYC Arts Groups Face ‘Existential’ Challenge  
with Trump Cuts to Federal Funding.”
27. Arya Sundaram, “NYC Immigration Arrests and  
Deportations Surge after Slow Start, Data Shows,”  
Gothamist, August 31, 2025, https://gothamist.com/
news/nyc-immigration-arrests-and-deportations-surge- 
after-slow-start-data-shows.
28. Rayna Breuer, “European Artists Boycott US over  
Trump’s Culture Policy,” DW, March 26, 2025, 
https://www.dw.com/en/european-artists-boy-
cott-us-over-trumps-culture-policy/a-72040096.
29. New York City Tourism + Conventions, 2025 Travel &  
Tourism Outlook (November 2025), https://assets.
ctfassets.net/1aemqu6a6t65/4N6LiNiBzK8jRdzRZ-
poKY/8ef83d8b1891119f384a6495d5967911/2025_
Travel__Tourism_Outlook_November.pdf; Matthew  
Haag, “New York City Predicted Record Tourism.  
Then Came Trump,” New York Times, May 8, 2025,  
https://www.nytimes.com/2025/05/08/nyregion/
nyc-tourism.html.
30. “New York City Tourism on Track to Finish 2024 with  
$79 Billion in Economic Impact and $51 Billion in  
Direct Spending Across the Five Boroughs,” New York  
City Tourism + Conventions, December 20, 2024,  
https://www.business.nyctourism.com/press-media/
press-releases/NYC-Tourism-year-end-tourism- 
numbers-2024.
31. Rana Pratap, “Canada Grounds US Travel Plans as Airlines 
Pivot Toward Europe,” Travel and Tour World, April 19, 
2025, https://www.travelandtourworld.com/news/article/
canada-grounds-us-travel-plans-as-air-canada-westjet-and-
porter-soar-toward-europe-with-flights-to-italy-uk-greece-
spain-and-netherlands-as-lufthansa-joins-the-surge-new-
report-you-need-to-know/.
32. Marisa Garcia, “These 6 U.S. Cities Lost the Most Airline 
Seats as Canada Reacts to Trump Policy,” Forbes, April 
6, 2025, https://www.forbes.com/sites/marisagarcia/ 
2025/04/06/these-6-us-cities-lost-the-most-airline-seats-
as-canada-reacts-to-trump-policy/; Government of Canada, 
“Travel Advice and Advisories for United States (USA),” 
Travel.gc.ca, October 1, 2025, https://travel.gc.ca/ 
destinations/united-states.
33. Logan Culwell-Block, “Latest Broadway Demographic 
Report Shows Tourism Dollars Are Boosting Broadway,” 
Playbill, February 4, 2025, accessed November 25, 2025, 
https://playbill.com/article/latest-broadway-demographic- 
report-shows-tourism-dollars-are-boosting-broadway.
34. Jason Bram, Tourism’s Role in New York City’s Economy 
(Office of the New York City Comptroller, 2025),  
https://comptroller.nyc.gov/reports/tourisms-role-in-new-
york-citys-economy/; Scott Simon, “Broadway Is Seeing 
a Steady Revival after the Pandemic, Partly Buoyed by 
Tourists,” NPR, February 8, 2025, https://www.npr.
org/2025/02/08/nx-s1-5283976/broadway-is-seeing-a-
steady-revival-after-the-pandemic-partly-buoyed-by-tourists.
35. Michael Paulson, “The Broadway Musical Is in  
Trouble,” New York Times, September 22, 2025,  
https://www.nytimes.com/2025/09/22/theater/ 
broadway-musicals-finances.html.
36. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of data from the  
Current Employment Statistics Survey, defining the film 
and TV sector as NAICS 512 Motion Picture and Sound 
Recording Industries.
37. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of data from  
Lightcast, defining the film and TV sector as NAICS 512 
Motion Picture and Sound Recording Industries,  
accessed August 21, 2025.
38. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of data from the  
Current Employment Statistics Survey, defining the  
advertising sector as NAICS 5418 Advertising, Public  
Relations, and Related Services.
39. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of data from  
Lightcast, defining the advertising sector as NAICS 5418 
Advertising, Public Relations, and Related Services,  
accessed August 21, 2025.
40. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of data from  
Lightcast, accessed August 21, 2025.
41. World Economic Forum, Future of Jobs Report 2025  
(January 2025).
53
CREATIVE NEW YORK 2025
42. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of data from Lightcast, 
defining the fashion sector as NAICS 54149 Other Special-
ized Design Services, accessed August 21, 2025.
43. Partnership for New York City, At a Crossroads: New  
York City’s Status as a Global Fashion Capital  
(September 2024).
44. Murals for Good, “#1 Stop Discrimin-Asian,”  
https://muralsforgood.org/%231-stop-discrimin-asian.
45. NYC Department of Cultural Affairs, “City Artist Corps,” 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/dcla/cultural-funding/ 
cityartistcorp.page.
46. “Symposium: AI x ART,” New York Live Arts, 2019,  
https://newyorklivearts.org/event/ai-art-symposium/.
47. “Refik Anadol on AI, Algorithms, and the Machine as 
Witness,” Museum of Modern Art, December 20, 2022, 
https://www.moma.org/magazine/articles/821; “Sasha 
Stiles: A Living Poem,” Museum of Modern Art, 2025, 
https://www.moma.org/calendar/exhibitions/5839.
48. “Harold Cohen: AARON,” Whitney Museum of American 
Art, 2024, https://whitney.org/exhibitions/harold- 
cohen-aaron; “Hand in Hand: AI Art and Creativity,”  
Whitney Museum of American Art, 2024,  
https://whitney.org/events/hand-hand-ai-art.
49. Martha Schwendener, “A.I. Meets Ancient Philosophy,” 
New York Times, October 9, 2025, https://www.nytimes.
com/2025/10/09/arts/design/lu-yang.html.
50. “‘Mountain of Many Voices’—Live: A Collective Storytelling 
Performance and Artist Talk,” Asia Art Archive in America, 
accessed October 15, 2025, https://www.aaa-a.org/
programs/mountain-of-many-voices-live-a-collective-story-
telling-performance-and-artist-talk.
51. “LG Guggenheim Art and Technology Initiative,”  
Guggenheim Museums and Foundation, accessed  
October 15, 2025, https://www.guggenheim.org/ 
initiatives/lg-guggenheim-art-and-technology-initiative.
52. “Doris Duke Foundation Announces Grants to 20  
Innovative Theater, Jazz, Contemporary Dance and 
Multi-Disciplinary Projects Through Its Inaugural  
Performing Arts Technologies Lab,” Doris Duke  
Foundation, September 25, 2024, https://www.dorisduke.
org/news--insights/articles/doris-duke-foundation- 
announces-grants-to-20-innovative-theater-jazz- 
contemporary-dance-and-multi-disciplinary-projects- 
through-its-inaugural-performing-arts-technologies-lab/.
53. Matt O’Brien, “Visual Artists Fight Back Against Artificial 
Intelligence Companies for Repurposing Their Work,”  
PBS NewsHour, August 31, 2023, https://www.pbs.org/
newshour/arts/visual-artists-fight-back-against-artificial- 
intelligence-companies-for-repurposing-their-work.
54. “Cancel the Christie’s AI Art Auction,” open letter,  
February 8, 2025, https://openletter.earth/cancel-the-
christies-ai-art-auction-f5135435.
55. Eli Wizevich, “Artists Sign Open Letter Protesting Christie’s 
Upcoming All-A.I. Art Auction,” Smithsonian Magazine, 
February 14, 2025, https://www.smithsonianmag.com/
smart-news/artists-sign-open-letter-protesting-christies- 
upcoming-all-ai-art-auction-180986061/.
56. “Augmented Intelligence,” Christie’s, accessed  
October 15, 2025, https://onlineonly.christies.com/s/
augmented-intelligence/lots/3837.
57. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of data from the  
2023 American Community Survey (5-year estimates).
58. Center for an Urban Future, “Surveying NYC’s Arts  
After COVID,” https://nycfuture.org/research/ 
surveying-nycs-arts-aftercovid.
59. HueArts New York State, Brown Paper: Mapping a Future 
for Arts Entities Founded and Led by Black, Indigenous, 
Latine, Asian, Pacific Islander, Middle Eastern, and All 
People of Color in New York State, accessed December 9, 
2025, https://www.hueartsnewyork.org/brown-paper/.
60. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of Preliminary  
Expenditure Reports of the City of New York, FY15–FY26.
61. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of data from the NYC 
Department of Cultural Affairs, DCLA Programs Funding 
dataset, NYC Open Data, https://data.cityofnewyork.us/
Recreation/DCLA-Programs-Funding/y6fv-k6p7.
62. NYC Department of Cultural Affairs, “Cultural Development 
Fund (CDF) Reforms,” https://www.nyc.gov/site/dcla/ 
cultural-funding/cdf-reforms.page.
63. NYC Office of the Mayor, “Mayor Adams, Department  
of Cultural Affairs Award More Than $58 Million in  
Grants to Over 1,000 Nonprofits Through Cultural  
Development Fund,” December 15, 2022, press release, 
https://www.nyc.gov/office-of-the-mayor/news/912-22/
mayor-adams-department-cultural-affairs-award-more- 
58-million-grants-over-1-000.
64. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of data from  
Mayor’s Management Report, FY15–FY24; NYC Department 
of Cultural Affairs, “CUNY Cultural Corps Expands in Its 
Second Year,” September 8, 2017, press release,  
https://www.nyc.gov/site/dcla/about/pressrelease/ 
PR-2017-09-08-CUNY-CulturalCorps-Expansion.page.
65. Julia Jacobs, “How Weeksville, a Center of Black History, 
Fought to Survive,” New York Times, April 6, 2021,  
https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/06/arts/design/
save-weeksville-cig.html; NYC Office of the Mayor, “Mayor 
Adams, DCLA Announce Biggest Expansion of City’s  
Cultural Institutions Group in Five Decades,” September 
30, 2025, press release, https://www.nyc.gov/mayors- 
office/news/2025/09/mayor-adams-dcla-announce- 
biggest-expansion-of-city-scultural.
54
66. CreateNYC, https://createnyc.cityofnewyork.us/the- 
cultural-plan/main/.
67. NYC Office of Media and Entertainment, “Mayor de Blasio 
Signs Bill Establishing ‘Nightlife Mayor,’” September 17, 
2017, press release, https://www.nyc.gov/site/mome/
news/091917-nightlife-office.page; NYC Office of Nightlife, 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/sbs/businesses/nightlife.page.
68. NYC Department of Cultural Affairs, “New York City Artist 
Corps Are Offering 100+ Free Public Engagements Across 
the City Through the End of September,” September 10, 
2021, press release, https://www.nyc.gov/site/dcla/
about/pressrelease/PR-2021-09-10-Artist-Corps- 
Engagements.page; New York Foundation for the Arts,  
“City Artist Corps Grants,” https://www.nyfa.org/grant- 
history/city-artist-corps-grants/; NYC Department of  
Cultural Affairs, “New York City Artist Corps Culminates 
with a Record High 300+ Public Events, Performances, 
and Programs the Last Week of October,” October 25, 
2021, press release, https://www.nyc.gov/site/dcla/
about/pressrelease/PR-2021-10-25-CAC-Media.page.
69. Anne del Castillo and B.J. Jones, “Opinion: NYC Create  
in Place & Safeguarding Our Creative Capital,” City Limits, 
January 8, 2025, https://citylimits.org/opinion-nyc- 
create-in-place-safeguarding-our-creative-capital/.
70. NYC Department of Cultural Affairs, “Public Artist in  
Residence,” https://www.nyc.gov/site/dcla/publicart/ 
pair.page.
71. NYC Department of Cultural Affairs, “NYC Department  
of Cultural Affairs and Agency Partners Launch Open  
Call for 2024 Public Artists in Residence,” July 11, 2024, 
press release, https://www.nyc.gov/site/dcla/about/ 
pressrelease/PR-2024-7-11-DCLA-Launches-2024- 
Public-Artists-in-Residence-Open-Call.page.
72. NYC Department of Cultural Affairs, “NYC Department  
of Cultural Affairs Releases Inaugural Gallery of  
Pre-approved ‘City Canvas’ Artworks for Use on  
Protective Street Structures,” July 15, 2024, press  
release, https://www.nyc.gov/site/dcla/about/ 
pressrelease/PR-2024-7-15-DCLA-Releases- 
Inaugural-City-Canvas-PreApproved-Artwork-Gallery.page.
73. City University of New York, “CUNY, NYC Department  
of Cultural Affairs, Rockefeller Foundation Announce  
New Paid Internship Program for Students, CUNY  
Cultural Corps,” September 9, 2016, press release, 
https://www.cuny.edu/news/cuny-nyc-department- 
of-cultural-affairs-rockefeller-foundation-an-
nounce-new-paid-internship-program-for-students-cuny- 
cultural-corps/; CUNY Cultural Corps, “Current Partners,” 
https://www.cuny.edu/academics/current-initiatives/ 
cultural-corps/program-partners/#current-partners.
74. NYC Department of Cultural Affairs, “As CUNY Cultural 
Corps Enters Its Fourth Year, NYC Department of Cultural 
Affairs and CUNY Announce New Permanent Public  
Funding,” September 17, 2019, press release,  
https://www.nyc.gov/site/dcla/about/pressrelease/PR-
2019-09-17-CUNY-Cultural-Corps-Kickoff-2019-20.page.
75. Center for an Urban Future, “CUF Report Inspires Major 
New State Investment in the Arts,” https://nycfuture.org/
impact/cuf-report-inspires-major-new-state-investment-in-
the-arts.
76. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of NYC Parks &  
Recreation Department webpage, “Art in the Parks  
Current Exhibits,” https://www.nycgovparks.org/art.
77. Ibid.
78. The Forest Park Trust, “Summer Concert Series 2025,” 
https://forestparktrust.org/events/2024-summer- 
concert-series-4acsh.
79. William Hamilton, “Displaced Artists Open a New Front  
at the Brooklyn Army Terminal,” New York Times,  
April 22, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/22/
arts/design/artbuilt-brooklyn-army-terminal.html; NYC  
Department of Cultural Affairs, “Key Indicators,”  
CreateNYC, https://createnyc.cityofnewyork.us/ 
action-plan-key-indicators/.
80. NYCEDC, “Gansevoort Square,” https://edc.nyc/project/
gansevoort-square.
81. NYCEDC, “Hunts Point Resiliency Celebrates Artists in  
Residence at August 26th Event,” Medium, August 23, 
2017, https://medium.com/hunts-point-resiliency/ 
hunts-point-resiliency-celebrates-artists-in-residence-at- 
august-26th-event-9081398178c9.
82. NYC Department of Cultural Affairs, “About PAIR,”  
https://www.nyc.gov/site/dcla/publicart/pair.page.
83. Center for an Urban Future, analysis of NYC Department of 
Cultural Affairs press releases and PAIR program webpage, 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/dcla/publicart/pair.page.
