 
more 
 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
JOCELYN E. STRAUBER 
COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE Release #34-2025 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 4, 2025 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
  
DOI ISSUES REPORT TO COMBAT “SKIMMING” OF ELECTRONIC BENEFIT TRANSFER CARDS 
THAT PROVIDE ESSENTIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO LOW-INCOME NEW YORKERS 
From August 2023 to March 2025, NYC reimbursed $48.6 million in stolen benefits  
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Investigation (“DOI”), 
issued a public report on DOI’s investigative findings and recommendations to prevent the theft of Cash 
Assistance (“CA”) and funds from the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (“SNAP”), essential 
financial assistance that is provided to 1.8 million low -income families and individuals in New York City to 
help them meet basic needs , such as food and rent. The City Department of Social Services (“DSS”) 
administers these benefits through New York State-issued Electronic Benefit Transfer (“EBT”) cards, which 
use a magnetic stripe to transfer  data and are particularly  vulnerable to “skimming,” the theft of card 
information via devices placed surreptitiously on card-reading machines, such as ATMs or point -of-sale 
(“POS”) terminals.  
 
In June 2022, with the assistance of DSS, DOI began looking into reports from hundreds of DSS 
clients that their EBT accounts were drained of SNAP and/or CA benefits at various locations in and out of 
New York State. Between August 2023 and March 2025, DSS issued a total of $48.6 million in 
reimbursements for reported stolen SNAP and CA benefits. This Report seeks to raise awareness about 
skimming and to help New Yorkers with EBT cards identify and avoid potential skimming devices at local 
retailers. The Report also outlines DOI’s support for amending the social services law to require the Office 
of Temporary Disability Assistance (“OTDA”), which administers SNAP and CA statewide, to m odernize 
EBT cards by installing EMV chips in them, or for OTDA to do so without a change in the law. A copy of the 
Report, which includes the six recommendations DOI issued to OTDA and DSS,  is attached to this press 
release and can also be found at this link:  
https://www.nyc.gov/site/doi/newsroom/public-reports-
current.page  
 
DOI Commissioner Jocelyn E. Strauber said, “ Until Electronic Benefit Transfer Cards are chip-
enabled, the best defense against skimming is public awareness. DOI and our law enforcement par tners 
have and will continue to investigate this significant threat to public resources  and hold wrongdoers 
accountable, but as this R eport describes, enforcement efforts are not a complete solution.  This Report 
informs the public about signs that a point -of-sale terminal may be compromised, and makes other 
recommendations to reduce the risk  that benefit cards will be successfully  ‘skimmed.’ I thank the City 
Department of Social Services for its partnership and assistance in protecting the public funds that support 
some of New York’s most vulnerable citizens.” 
 
Skimming is a common and widespread form of card fraud. When a cardholder swipes their 
magnetic stripe card, the skimming device captures the card’s number, PIN number, and the cardholder’s 
name. The cardholder’s data then is transferred via Bluetooth to individuals who use the information to 
conduct unauthorized transactions via duplicated cards, online purchases, or to engage in identity theft. 

2 
 
EBT cards, which are effectively debit cards for CA and SNAP benefit accounts, are one type of card that 
can be skimmed using these devices. In the case of EBT card skimming, the thieves will steal and 
sometimes deplete the clients’ public benefits from their account s, leaving the client without the CA and 
SNAP funds to support their basic needs. The data is transferred from the skimmer remotely, such that 
there is no need to return to the retail location to collect the skimmer, and there is little if any delay in using 
the data to steal clients’ benefits after capturing the data. These circumstances make it more dif ficult for 
law enforcement to identify individuals engaged in this type of fraud. 
 
The volume of this fraud in New York City is significant: between August 2023 and March 2025, 
DSS processed 142,178 SNAP reimbursement applications from victims of EBT theft , approved 96,048 
applications, and issued reimbursements of stolen benefits of $43.7 million. During the same time, DSS 
processed 60,337 CA reimbursement applications , approved 27,176 applications, and issued 
reimbursements of stolen benefits of $4.9 mill ion. The actual loss to New Yorkers is likely much greater, 
because th ese figures do  not include unreported losses . Since December 2024, federal funding for 
reimbursements for stolen SNAP funds is no longer available, leaving thousands of individual victims 
without recourse to have their stolen benefits restored for thefts post-dating December 2024.  
 
For this Report,  DOI and DSS analyzed SNAP and CA transactions that used stolen EBT cards 
throughout New York City, in an effort to locate POS terminals at local retailers where skimmers were 
placed. In a recent operation, DOI, along with the New York Police Department (“NYPD”) Financial Crimes 
Unit, DSS, and federal law enforcement partners, found approximately 55 skimming devices that had been 
placed on POS terminals at local retailers and investigated several individuals suspected of installing those 
devices. Law enforcement efforts to address skimming, while ongoing, can be challenging in part because 
real-time information about skimming in progress is not currently available. Thus, by the time it becomes 
clear that a card has been skimmed, the funds may already be gone, and efforts to obtain video footage or 
other pertinent evidence may be compromised by delay. 
 
DOI has determined that the best way to prevent much of this fraud is to upgrade the existing EBT 
cards with magnetic stripes to more secure chip- enabled EBT cards.  The Report also recommends 
amending the social services law to require OTDA to modernize EBT cards by installing EMV chips in them. 
Chips would make EBT cards more secure because they generate and transfer a unique, encrypted code 
for each purchase, making theft of card information and benefits via skimming more difficult.  Currently, 
there are two State Senate bills and two State Assembly bills that would mandate the implementation of 
chips in EBT cards. The bills vary slightly in wording, but in substance, all four of them would require the 
commissioner of OTDA to implement EBT cards with EMV chips on them. DOI supports these legislative 
efforts and submitted a memo in support of Senate Bill 1465 and Assembly Bill 699. DOI is informed that 
DSS has also submitted a memorandum in support of this legislation. However, legislation is not required 
in order for OTDA to take this action.
 DOI recommends New York urgently implement EMV chips in EBT 
cards to reduce the risk of skimming theft. Until New York implements EBT cards with EMV chips, DOI 
recommends five additional preventative measures to enhance the security of the EBT cards:  
 
 
1. OTDA should work with the EBT card vendor to create an  alert that notifies clients when 
an out-of-state or suspicious transaction is pending and requires that they authenticate the 
transaction via the application or an automated phone call.  
 
2. OTDA should work with the EBT card vendor to create a security feature that alerts clients 
in real-time via text message when their PINs are changed. Such feature should be the 
default setting and allow clients to opt out (rather than the existing alerts via email and opt-
in feature).  
 
3. OTDA should create an alert triggered by repetitive transactions that occur at common 
locations between 12:00 AM and 2:00 AM, and promptly report the alert to law enforcement 
immediately. 
 
4. DSS should continue to work with USDA and law enforcement to promptly remove and 
confiscate identified or suspected skimming devices. 
 
5. DSS should continue their ongoing work of early skimming detection and analytics, 
informing the public of the risks and the necessary precautions, including via distribution of 
flyers and public seminars. 
3 
 
 
At DOI, the investigation was conducted by former DOI Investigative Attorney Alix Hirs h and 
Assistant Inspector General Daniel Malvey of DOI’s Office of the Inspector General for DSS, with assistance 
from Data Analyst Zachary Sayle, Assistant Inspector General Alexandra Davie, and Director of 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Special Counsel Rebecca Chasan, and was supervised by Acting Inspector 
General Jeremy Reyes, Deputy Commissioner of Strategic Initiatives Christopher Ryan, and Deputy 
Commissioner/Chief of Investigations Dominick Zarrella.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DOI is one of the oldest law-enforcement agencies in the country and New York City’s corruption watchdog. Investigations 
may involve any agency, officer, elected official or employee of the City, as well as those who do business with or receive benefits 
from the City. DOI’s strategy attacks corruption comprehensively through systemic investigations that lead to high-impact arrests, 
preventive internal controls and operational reforms that improve the way the City runs. 
 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
 
  
 
New York City 
Department of Investigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber 
Commissioner 
 
Jeremy Reyes 
Acting Inspector General for the Department of Social Services 
 
 
September 2025 
 
DOI’s Findings Regarding “Skimming” of 
Electronic Benefit Transfer Cards that Provide 
Vital Funds to Low-Income New Yorkers 
and Related Recommendations 
Skimming Report September 2025 
 
 
 
Table of Contents
 
 
I. Executive Summary ............................................................................................................................. 1  
 
II. Background .......................................................................................................................................... 2  
A. Cash Assistance and Supplemental Nutrition Program ................................................................ 2 
B. Skimming ........................................................................................................................................... 3  
C. EBT Card Technology ....................................................................................................................... 4  
 
III. Impact ................................................................................................................................................... 5  
A. Cost of Skimming .............................................................................................................................. 5  
 
IV. Law Enforcement Response ............................................................................................................... 7 
A. Investigations .................................................................................................................................... 7  
B. Removing Skimming Devices .......................................................................................................... 8 
C. Investigative Challenges .................................................................................................................. 9  
 
V. Preventative Measures ........................................................................................................................ 9  
A. Beneficiary and Retailer Awareness and Detection ....................................................................... 9 
B. Legislative Efforts in New York and in Other Jurisdictions ......................................................... 11 
 
VI. Conclusion ......................................................................................................................................... 13 
 
 
  
  
 
Skimming Report September 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 1  
 
I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
The New York City Department of Social Services (DSS) 1 administers both Cash 
Assistance (CA) and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), which collectively 
provide monthly financial benefits to 1.8 million low -income families and individuals in New 
York City to help them meet their basic needs such as food and rent. Benefits are disbursed through 
Electronic Benefit Transfer cards (EBT), which can be used like debit cards to purchase food and 
other household necessities at participating stores. EBT cards issued to residents of New York 
State, including City residents, use magnetic stripes to transfer data. This differs from standard 
credit cards which, per industry standards, are equipped with EMV chip technology that more 
securely transfers data and is therefore less susceptible to fraud. Cards th at use magnetic stripes 
are particularly vulnerable to skimming, one of the most prevalent forms of card fraud. Skimming 
is the theft of card information via devices placed surreptitiously on card -reading machines, such 
as ATMs or point -of-sale (POS) termi nals. These devices mimic the look of the card -reading 
machines and are difficult to detect. Wrongdoers replicate the stolen information and use it to make 
counterfeit cards or otherwise use the data to make unauthorized purchases or withdraw money 
from the cardholders’ accounts, without notice to the true cardholder.   
The volume of alleged skimming theft from EBT cards in New York City is significant. 
Between August 2023 and March 2025, DSS processed 142,178 SNAP reimbursement 
applications from victims of EBT theft, approved 96,048 applications, and issued reimbursements 
of stolen benefits of $43.7 million. During the same time, DSS processed 60,337 CA 
reimbursement applications, approved 27,176 applications, and issued reimbursements of stolen 
benefits of $4.9 million. As of December 2024, federal funding for reimbursements for stolen 
SNAP funds is no longer available, leaving thousands of individual victims without recourse to 
have their stolen benefits restored for thefts post-dating December 2024.
2 
In June 2022, the New York City Department of Investigation (DOI), with DSS’ assistance, 
initiated several investigations in response to reports from hundreds of DSS clients that their EBT 
accounts were drained of SNAP and/or CA benefits at various locations i n and out of New York 
State without their knowledge. DOI and DSS analyzed SNAP and CA transactions using stolen 
EBT cards throughout New York City in an effort to locate POS terminals at local retailers where 
skimmers were placed. In a recent operation, DO I, along with the New York Police Department 
(NYPD) Financial Crimes Unit, DSS, and federal law enforcement partners, found approximately 
55 skimming devices that had been placed on POS terminals at local retailers and investigated 
several individuals suspected of installing those devices. 
                                                        
1 In April 2016, the Human Resources Administration (HRA) and the Department of Homeless Services (DHS) were 
consolidated within the Department of Social Services (DSS). The matters evaluated in this report fall within the purview of 
HRA, which helps over three million vulnerable New York City residents through the administration of more than 12 major 
public assistance programs, including cash assistance, food assistance, and Medicaid. HRA has over 12,000 employees and 
administers over $10 billion in public assistance funds annually. 
2 Federal legislation authorizing reimbursements of stolen SNAP benefits with federal funds expired on December 20, 2024. 
Victims of stolen SNAP benefits can still file claims for funds that were stolen before December 20, 2024, until September 
30,2025, https://www.nyc.gov/site/hra/help/request-for-replacement-of-stolen-benefits.page (Last visited August 21, 2025). 
Stolen CA funds are still eligible for reimbursements. 
Skimming Report September 2025 
 
 
 
2 
 
 Law enforcement efforts to address skimming, while ongoing, can be challenging in part 
because real-time information about skimming in progress is not currently available. Thus, by the 
time it becomes clear that a card has been skimmed, the funds may already be gone, and efforts to 
obtain video footage or other pertinent evidence may be compromised by the delay.  
This report seeks to raise awareness about skimming and to help New Yorkers with EBT 
cards identify and avoid potential skimming devices at local retailers. The report also outlines 
DOI’s support for amending the social services law to require the Office of Temporary Disability 
Assistance (OTDA), which administers SNAP and CA statewide, to modernize EBT cards by 
installing EMV chips in them, or for OTDA to do so without a change in the law. Chips would 
make EBT cards more secure because they generate and transfer a unique, encrypted code for each 
purchase, making theft of card information and of benefits via skimmi ng more difficult.  In the 
interim period, before EMV chips are installed, this report recommends that DSS and OTDA take 
additional steps to reduce the risk of skimming and benefit fraud by educating cardholders, 
encouraging account monitoring, and enhancing the existing security features.  
II. BACKGROUND  
 
A. Cash Assistance and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 
Nearly two million New Yorkers rely on public benefits. The most common forms are CA 
and SNAP. Both CA and SNAP benefits are administered through EBT cards with funds disbursed 
once or twice per month, depending on the benefit.
3 The City’s Human Resources Administration 
(HRA) within DSS administers both CA and SNAP to New York City residents, which are 
overseen by OTDA and the federal government.  
Through CA, eligible families may receive up to 60 months of federally funded cash 
assistance under the Temporary Aid to Needy Families Program (TANF).
4 Single individuals 
without children and families who have already received cash assistance for 60 m onths may 
receive benefits under the New York State Safety Net Program.5 The amount of CA issued depends 
on household size, rent, and income; CA can be used for food, utilities, and other household 
expenses.
6 Some CA beneficiaries may be required to engage in work and/or educational activities 
as a condition of receiving benefits. 7 In May of 2025, more than 600,000 New York City 
households received CA, and nearly $223 million was disbursed.8 
SNAP, formerly known as the Food Stamp Program, is the cornerstone  of the nation’s 
safety net and nutrition assistance programs and aids millions of eligible low -income people. 9 
                                                        
3According to DSS, SNAP funds are issued to beneficiaries once per month, while CA funds are issued twice per month. 
4 New York City Department of Social Services, Human Resource Administration, Cash Assistance Program, 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/hra/help/cash-assistance.page, (Last visited August 21, 2025) 
5 Id. 
6 New York City BAR, New York State Cash Assistance Program, Cash Assistance Eligibility, https://www.nycbar.org/get-legal-
help/article/public-benefits/new-york-state-cash-assistance-program (Last visited August 21,2025) 
7 New York City Department of Social Services, Human Resource Administration, Cash Assistance Program, 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/hra/help/cash-assistance.page, (Last visited August 21, 2025) 
8 New York City Department of Social Services, Human Resource Administration, HRA’s Fact Sheet, 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/hra/downloads/pdf/facts/hra_facts/2025/hra_facts_2025_05.pdf (Last visited August 21, 2025) 
9 Center on Budget and Policy and Policy Priorities, “SNAP is Effective and Efficient,” available at   
http://www.cbpp.org/research/snap-is-effective-and-efficient, (Last visited August 21,2025) 
 
Skimming Report September 2025 
 
 
 
3 
 
Benefit levels for SNAP are based on criteria including but not limited to, household size and 
income levels.10 In Federal Fiscal Year 2023, in New York State, the average SNAP household 
received $355 per month in benefits, consisted of 1.7 people, and had a gross monthly income of 
$1,100.
11 In the same year in New York State, among other households, SNAP assisted 25.2% of 
the State’s households with children, 43.8% of the States households with elderly individuals, and 
16.5% of the State’s households with non- elderly individuals with disabilities.
12 SNAP can be 
used for purchases of food, but  not for items such as alcohol, hot food, or non- food products.13 
The federal legislation authorizing reimbursements of stolen SNAP benefits with federal funds 
expired on December 20, 2024. Victims of stolen SNAP benefits can still file claims for funds that 
were stolen before December 20, 2024.
14 In New York City, reimbursement requests are processed 
by HRA. 
B. Skimming 
 
Skimming is a common and widespread form of card fraud. Skimming devices, pictured 
below, are placed on card-reading machines, such as ATMs or POS terminals, that are capable of 
collecting the card’s data when the card is swiped on the card-reading machine.15 
   
When a cardholder swipes their magnetic stripe card, the skimming device captures the 
card’s number, PIN number, and the cardholder’s name. The cardholder’s data is then transferred 
via Bluetooth to individuals who use the information to conduct unauthorized transactions via 
duplicated cards, online purchases, or to engage in identity theft. EBT cards, which are effectively 
                                                        
10 New York State Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), 
https://otda.ny.gov/programs/snap/ (Last visited August 21, 2025) 
11 United States Department of Agriculture, Characteristics of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Households: Fiscal 
Year 2023, https://fns-prod.azureedge.us/sites/default/files/resource-files/snap-FY23-Characteristics-Report.pdf, (Last visited 
August 21,2025) 
12 Id. 
13 New York State Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), 
https://otda.ny.gov/programs/snap/qanda.asp#purchase, (Last visited August 21,2025) 
14 New York State, myBenefits, https://mybenefits.ny.gov/mybenefits/begin, (Last visited August 21,2025) 
15 New York City Department of Social Services, Human Resource Administration, For more information on identifying 
skimming devices see, https://www.nyc.gov/assets/hra/downloads/pdf/services/program_integrity/FLY-1095-Protect-Your-
Benefits-Skimming-en.pdf. (Last visited August 21,2025) 

Skimming Report September 2025 
 
 
 
4 
 
debit cards for CA and SNAP benefit accounts, are one type of card that can be skimmed using 
these devices. In the case of EBT card ski mming, cardholder information will be used to steal 
clients’ public benefits from their accounts, often leaving the client without the CA and SNAP 
funds to support their basic needs until the next disbursement. 
The data is transferred from the skimmer remo tely, such that there is no need to return to 
the retail location to collect the skimmer, and little if any delay in using the data to steal clients’ 
benefits after capturing the data. These circumstances make it more difficult for law enforcement 
to identify subjects. Perpetrators typically work in pairs - one person will distract the cashier or 
salesperson while the second person will place the skimming device on the POS terminal. The 
devices are typically replicas of the POS terminals, such that store owners may be unaware of the 
presence of a skimming device for an extended period of time. Oftentimes, store owners are alerted 
to the placement of a device only after multiple EBT card recipients report stolen funds, after 
noticing transactions at stores they have not frequented. Skimming devices have also been found 
on ATMs and gas pumps.  
Skimming devices are hard to detect because they are designed to blend in with legitimate 
card readers and payment terminals, or installed inside terminals, making them nearly invisible to 
customers and store owners. The following are warning signs of a card- reading machine that has 
been compromised by a skimming device: 
• Fake keypads that may feel soft or spongy and are inconsistent with the material of a 
normal terminal; 
• Scratches and missing pin pad shields;  
• Resistance to inserting a card or difficulty swiping it; or 
• Small hidden cameras on the POS terminals. 
 
C. EBT Card Technology 
 
Beginning around 2015, credit card companies started transitioning to chip cards (such as 
the card pictured below) that require insertion of a chip into a payment terminal or the use of a PIN 
number for contactless payment, as pictured below. This technology, called EMV chips, is now 
the industry standard in credit card transactions for reducing  credit card fraud. According to 
EMVCo, the global technological entity responsible for facilitating worldwide acceptance of EMV 
chips, as of the end of 2023, 70% of all credit cards have EMV chips.
16 
 
                                                        
16 EMVCo, Worldwide EMV Deployment Statistics, https://www.emvco.com/about-us/worldwide-emv-deployment-statistics/ 
(Last visited August 21, 2025) 
 

Skimming Report September 2025 
 
 
 
5 
 
Unlike modern credit cards which use EMV technology to transfer data, New York EBT 
cards rely on magnetic stripes to transfer funds, an outdated funds transfer technology. Magnetic 
stripes “transmit the card’s real number during a transaction.”17 Therefore, when the information 
is skimmed during a transaction, the full card number is captured, allowing for relatively easy 
duplication of the card data for use in future fraudulent transactions. 18 In contrast, EMV chips 
secure the data by generating a unique and encrypted code for every purchase and send that code 
to the business’s card reader.
19 Accordingly, skimmed data is harder to use in future fraudulent 
purchases because it is incomplete and or encrypted.  
Whereas the chip technology has been available for credit cards for a number of years, the 
chip technology  for EBT cards was only made available in August 2024, when the technical 
standards for using chip technology in EBT cards were ratified and published by the independent 
accredited standards committee.
20 In February 2025, the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS) of the 
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) stated that it was working to publish a rule to codify the 
accredited standards into regulation and to establish timeframes for upgrading to secure payment 
technologies. The USDA urged all states to adopt the new standards and to work to transition to 
chip technology as soon as feasible. 
21 
 
In June 2025, OTDA published a Request for Proposal (RFP) seeking competitive 
proposals from qualified vendors to provide EBT card services, including cards with chip and tap-
to-pay technology.22 Proposals in response to the RFP are due to OTDA by September 16, 2025.23  
III. IMPACT  
A. Cost of Skimming  
Between August 2023 and March 2025, the City administered $43.7 million of 
reimbursements to victims of SNAP theft and $4.9 million to victims of CA theft. However, the 
actual loss to New Yorkers is likely much greater, because this number does not include unreported 
losses.  With the expiration of federal funding for reimbursement of stolen SNAP funds, described 
above, reporting of theft is likely to drop further, even if theft does not decrease.   Some victims 
of stolen funds have sued OTDA for failing to protect their benefits by relying on outdated card 
technology, in the absence of other options.
24  
                                                        
17 Stripe, What are EMV Chip Cards?, https://stripe.com/resources/more/what-are-emv-chip-cards, (Last visited August 21, 
2025) 
18Stripe, How do EMV card readers work? https://stripe.com/resources/more/what-are-emv-chip-cards, (Last visited August 
21,2025).  
19 Stripe, How do EMV card readers work? https://stripe.com/resources/more/what-are-emv-chip-cards, (Last visited August 
21,2025).  
20 United States Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Services, Letter to Commissioners - SNAP EBT Chip Cards, 
https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/ebt/modernization/commissionerletter-chipcards, (Last visited August 21, 2025) 
21 Id. 
22New York State Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance, Common Benefit Identification Card (CBIC) RFP, 
https://otda.ny.gov/contracts/2025/CBIC/ (Last visited August, 21, 2025) 
23 Id. 
24 Gothamist, Victims of Food Benefits, Victims of food benefits theft sue NY over outdated tech they say puts them at risk - 
Gothamist (Last visited August 21, 2025) 
 
Skimming Report September 2025 
 
 
 
6 
 
  As illustrated in Figure 1, HRA has played a significant role in helping victims of SNAP 
and CA theft recover funds, issuing an average of approximately $3 million in reimbursement 
payments per month from August 2023 to December 2024. 25 As Figure 1 shows, in September 
2023, HRA administered nearly its highest amount of reimbursements, totaling close to $6 million 
for SNAP theft and approximately $500,000 for CA theft. During this time period, HRA’s handling 
of reimbursement claims was governed by OTDA’s Administrative Directive Memorandum, 
“Replacement Procedure for SNAP and/or TA Benefits Stolen via Skimming, Cloning, Phishing 
or other Fraudulent Methods.”
26 However, beginning in January 2025, the graph shows a dramatic 
decrease in reimbursements and only includes a small number of claims/reimbursements that relate 
to theft that occurred before the December 2024 expiration date and were filed thereafter.  
 
Figure 1 
Figure 2 shows the number of individual reimbursement applications HRA approved for 
CA and SNAP, and the volume of clients impacted by this theft. Most expenditures of stolen 
benefits are used for purposes other than their intended use, typically for personal gain, such as 
exchanging the benefits for cash.  
                                                        
25 Figure 1 is based on information in HRA’s internal database concerning reimbursement amounts for victims of SNAP and CA 
theft.  
26 The memo specifies that claims for reimbursement must be made 30 days from the date the client discovered the theft and 
client households are limited to two replacements per federal fiscal year (October 1 – September 30). Additionally, HRA 
employees assess each claim to determine its validity by checking factors such as who made the balance inquiry, balance 
inquiries that are not followed by an online purchase, and atypically timed balance inquiries, among others. 
https://otda.ny.gov/policy/directives/2023/ADM/23-ADM-07.pdf.  
 $-
 $1,000,000.00
 $2,000,000.00
 $3,000,000.00
 $4,000,000.00
 $5,000,000.00
 $6,000,000.00
 $7,000,000.00
Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
2023 2024 2025
Approved Reimbursement Amounts for Victims 
of SNAP and CA theft from August 2023 - Present
Cash Assistance SNAP
Skimming Report September 2025 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Figure 2 
IV. LAW ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE  
A. Investigations  
DOI’s multifaceted approach to combating skimming includes multiple operations with 
various law enforcement partners. While DOI continues to collaborate with DSS and with other 
law enforcement partners on the federal, state and local level, on a variety of skimming 
investigations, there are significant enforcement challenges, as set out below. For example, we 
have identified hundreds of subjects throughout the United States who have successfully 
skimmed EBT cards and stolen the associated benefits. While several individuals have been 
apprehended, challenges identifying and charging other wrongdoers persist.  
In addition to suspects who have used EBT card information to steal benefits, DOI has 
identified retailers who also appear to be involved in illegal skimming activities.  These retailers’ 
point of sale terminals were unlawfully programmed to accept EBT cards. As explained above, 
retailers must register and be authorized by FNS in order to accept SNAP benefits.
27 DOI 
discovered retailers who have stolen and/or misused FNS numbers to create the false impression 
that they are eligible EBT retailers. We suspect those retailers may also be using cards created 
with stolen EBT card information -- DOI found that many of the illicit transactions were made 
between 12:00 AM and 2:00 AM, which indicates that retailers not authorized to receive SNAP 
                                                        
27 See footnote 2. 
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
16,000
Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
2023 2024 2025
Approved SNAP and CA Applications from 
August 2023 - June 2025
Cash Assistance SNAP
Skimming Report September 2025 
 
 
 
8 
 
benefits are using cards created with stolen information to drain benefit funds from clients’ 
accounts.  
For cases where specific subjects could not be identified, but significant amounts of fraud 
were reported, DOI worked closely with DSS to identify store locations potentially complicit in 
skimming schemes both in and outside of New York City.   USDA has taken administrative 
action against certain of these stores, such as disqualifying their FNS numbers, while criminal 
investigations are ongoing. DOI continues to work with DSS by referring data to assist 
skimming-related law enforcement operations in jurisdictions beyond New York City. 
B. Removing Skimming Devices 
In May 2025, the NYPD Financial Crimes Unit, U.S. Secret Service, USDA, DOI, and 
DSS led a three-day coordinated effort called Operation Flagship. The agencies inspected 3,251 
POS terminals throughout New York City. Law enforcement removed 55 skimming devices, some 
of which appear in the photographs below, potentially saving approximately $16.5 million in EBT 
benefits from theft. Throughout the sweep, investigators spoke with store managers regarding 
skimming awareness and provided best practices for how to properly check for skimming devices. 
DOI and its law enforcement partners will continue to push for larger operations to remove devices 
that safeguard SNAP clients.  
 
 
Skimming devices found during Operation Flagship. 
Skimming Report September 2025 
 
 
 
9 
 
C. Investigative Challenges  
DOI and its law enforcement partners encounter significant obstacles in safeguarding 
beneficiaries of cash assistance and SNAP from the pervasive threat of skimming. The inherent 
difficulty in immediately identifying compromised cards leaves clients vulner able to prolonged, 
undetected theft of benefits. This delay allows perpetrators repeated access to replenished 
accounts. Consequently, by the time a beneficiary recognizes fraudulent activity, crucial video 
surveillance evidence at the point of compromise is often no longer available for effective law 
enforcement review and identification of the responsible individuals. Furthermore, the lag in 
detecting an active skimming device increases the likelihood that if perpetrators need to collect the 
equipment, they are able to do so before law enforcement intervention.  
 Another challenge is that it is difficult to know exactly where a skimming device has been 
placed. Investigators work with data analytics experts and make educated guesses based on the 
volume of reported fraud at specific locations, but traveling to the suspected location takes time 
and resources. Moreover, skimming devices are rarely placed at the same retailer or ATM more 
than once, which makes locating them a resource -heavy endeavor because inve stigators have to 
repeatedly respond to new suspected locations. 
Finally, DOI and its partners have identified several subjects who are not U.S. citizens and 
who are present in the country illegally and without documentation. As with any investigation, the 
absence of documentation makes identifying these perpetrators more difficult. Many of the 
suspects have significant resources, which allows them to travel throughout the country, thereby 
evading law enforcement. Another issue DOI has encountered when trying to identify perpetrators 
is the unpredictability of their illicit withdrawals. In other jurisdictions that administer benefits, 
sums are distributed on the 1
st and 15th of each month, which makes surveilling suspects slightly 
easier, given they will likely withdraw funds on those specific days. But in New York, funds can 
be disbursed on any day, determined by the client’s account number and when the client signed up 
for the benefits. This means investigators cannot easily predict the timing of illegal withdrawals.  
These challenges make clear that while investigations and prosecutions may deter some of 
these criminal activities, preventative measures are critical to eliminating this type of fraud. 
V. PREVENTATIVE MEASURES 
A. Beneficiary and Retailer Awareness and Detection 
As outlined above, detecting a skimming device on a card- reading device is challenging.  
However, there are several telltale signs, such as the feel of the fake terminal or difficulty inserting 
one’s card, that can alert the cardholder or the retailer to the existence of a skimming device. DOI 
recommends that retailers conduct a daily inspection of their POS terminals for skimming devices 
and that EBT cardholders conduct a physical inspection of a card- reading machine before using 
their card for a transaction. If clients suspect a skimming device, they should avoid using the 
payment terminal and report concerns to local law enforcement. 
DSS, with law enforcement partners, has taken several steps to inform clients of skimming 
and other forms of benefit fraud. For example, on the HRA website, there is a video depicting 
skimming, warning clients of the risks of benefit theft, and advising them to take precautionary 
Skimming Report September 2025 
 
 
 
10 
 
steps.28  HRA also has published fact sheets on the issue in multiple languages that include images 
of skimming devices.29 Most recently, the DSS Fraud Protection Unit and Kings County District 
Attorney’s Office held a joint seminar on skimming for clients in Brighton Beach.30  
OTDA advises EBT clients to use a new freeze/unfreeze card feature, which makes a card 
unusable when a client is not making a purchase, to help secure EBT cards and protect their 
benefits through the ebtEDGE mobile app.31 The ebtEDGE mobile app can be downloaded on any 
smartphone.32 The client can log in and tap the new “Freeze/Unfreeze” icon on the Home Screen 
to protect their cards when not in use. OTDA suggests freezing EBT cards whenever the client is 
not making a purchase to secure their benefits. DSS advises clients in its municipality to do the 
same.  OTDA’s flyer on this point is included below at Figure 3. 
                                                        
28 New York City Department of Social Services, Human Resource Administration, Fraud prevention, 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/hra/help/fraud-prevention.page (last visited August 21, 2025) 
29 New York City Department of Social Services, Human Resource Administration, Protect your Benefits, 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/hra/downloads/pdf/services/program_integrity/FLY-1095-Protect-Your-Benefits-Skimming-en.pdf, 
(Last visited August 21, 2025) 
30 Instagram Post, News 12 Brooklyn, Brooklyn DA’s office Hosts EBT Fraud Seminar, 
https://www.instagram.com/reel/DL59EhgBmiO/ (Last visited August 21, 2025) 
31 New York State Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance, EBT Scam Alert https://otda.ny.gov/workingfamilies/EBT-
scam-alert.asp. (Last visited August 21, 2025) 
32 Access the ebtEDGE website here: http://www.ebtedge.com/   
Skimming Report September 2025 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Figure 3 
In addition, clients should frequently change their EBT PINs so that if a card is 
compromised, the perpetrator cannot continue to access funds, and frequently check their account 
information for any unauthorized transactions. According to OTDA, the ebtEDGE  app has a 
feature that allows clients to opt in to email notifications when their PIN has been changed. 
However, notifications via text message or phone calls are not an option. 
B. Legislative Efforts in New York and in Other Jurisdictions 
 Based on our investigative challenges and findings outlined above, it is DOI’s position that 
the best way to prevent much of this fraud is to use chip-enabled EBT cards rather than the existing 
EBT cards with magnetic stripes. Therefore, DOI strongly supports the implementation of EMV 
chips into New York’s EBT cards. Currently, there are two New York State Senate bills and two 

Skimming Report September 2025 
 
 
 
12 
 
New York State Assembly bills that would mandate the implementation of chips in EBT cards. 33 
The bills vary slightly in wording, but in substance, all four require the commissioner of OTDA to 
issue EBT cards with EMV chips. DOI supports these legislative efforts and submitted a memo in 
support of Senate Bill 1465 and Assembly Bill 699. DOI is informed that DSS has also submitted 
a memorandum in support of this legislation. However, legislation is not required in order for 
OTDA to take this action, and DOI urges OTDA to update the EBT cards as soon as possible. 
In addition to the proposed New York state legislation, there is proposed federal legislation 
that would require SNAP cards (EBT cards) to have chips that align with the credit card industry 
standard. The Enhanced Cybersecurity for SNAP Act of 2024 was introduced in March 2024 and 
is meant to “upgrade the security of electronic benefit cards and protect families in need from 
thieves who have stolen millions worth of essential food benefits.”
34 The bill’s announcement 
highlights that benefit fraud happens all over the country, and that the USDA should require states 
to issue cards with secure chips.  The bill would, among other things, provide states with funding 
to issue benefit cards with chips.  
Notably, FNS, the Department within the USDA that administers SNAP, published a letter 
to State Governors and Commissioners informing them that the agency had ratified and published 
new technical standards for SNAP EBT cards that “provide the opportunity for states to implement 
EBT cards with chip technology.”
35 The letters do not require states to transition to EMV chip 
EBT cards, but urges them to do so and reminds states that the “costs to transition to chip cards 
are a state administrative expense that is reimbursed by FNS at 50 percent.” 36 The letter to 
commissioners was last updated on February 6, 2025.  
California and other jurisdictions are moving towar ds implementing EMV chips in their 
EBT cards. According to the USDA, California began issuing SNAP EBT chip and tap cards to 
individuals in January 2025. The California cards still have a magnetic stripe on them, and 
cardholders are directed to use their c hip features first and to use the magnetic stripe only if the 
retailer is unable to accept the chip. California and bordering-state EBT retailers are being advised 
to update their POS terminals so that chips will work in them.
37 According to the California 
Department of Social Services, more than 3.2 million chip EBT cards will be distributed through 
                                                        
33The New York State Senate, Senate and Assembly Bills S1465, S1179 A699, A5742, 2025-2026 Legislative Session, 
https://www.nysenate.gov/legislation/bills/2025/S1465; https://www.nysenate.gov/legislation/bills/2025/A699; 
https://www.nysenate.gov/legislation/bills/2025/S1779; https://www.nysenate.gov/legislation/bills/2025/A5742 (Last visited 
August 21, 2025) 
34 Ron Wyden, United States Senator for Oregon, https://www.wyden.senate.gov/news/press-releases/wyden-fetterman-cassidy-
and-bipartisan-members-of-congress-introduce-enhanced-cybersecurity-for-snap-act-to-secure-food-benefits-against-hackers-
and-thieves (Last visited August 21, 2025) 
35 United States Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Services, Letter to Commissioners - SNAP EBT Chip Cards, 
https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/ebt/modernization/commissionerletter-chipcards, (Last visited August 21, 2025) 
36 United States Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Services, Letter to Commissioners - SNAP EBT Chip Cards, 
https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/ebt/modernization/commissionerletter-chipcards, (Last visited August 21, 2025). Beginning in 
Federal Fiscal Year 2027, the percentage of administrative costs that will be reimbursed by the federal government will drop to 
25 percent. Pub. Law 119-21 sec. 10106, https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/BILLS-119hr1eas/pdf/BILLS-119hr1eas.pdf(Last 
visited August 21, 2025) 
37 United States Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Services, SNAP EBT Chip and Tap Cards Have Been Deployed 
in California, https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/ebt/modernization/retailer-notice/CA-bordering-state, (Last visited August 21, 
2025) 
 
Skimming Report September 2025 
 
 
 
13 
 
June 2025. In addition to California, Oklahoma, Alabama, New Jersey, and Maryland have efforts 
to implement EBT chip cards in progress.38   
VI. CONCLUSION  
As federal funding for reimbursement of stolen benefits is no longer available, and because 
benefit fraud results in significant losses, DOI recommends New York urgently implement EMV 
chips in EBT cards to reduce the risk of skimming theft. U ntil New York implements EBT cards 
with EMV chips, DOI recommends five additional preventative measures to enhance the security 
of the EBT cards: 
Recommendations for DSS and/or OTDA 
1. OTDA should work with the EBT card vendor to create an opt-out feature that alerts clients 
when an out-of-state or suspicious transaction is pending and requires that they authenticate 
the transaction via the application or an automated phone call.  
2. OTDA should work with the EBT card vendor to create a security feature that alerts clients 
in real-time via text message when their PINs are changed. Such feature should be the 
default setting with an option for clients to opt out (rather than the existing alerts via email 
and opt-in feature).  
3. OTDA should create an alert triggered by repetitive transactions that occur at common 
locations between 12:00 AM and 2:00 AM, and promptly report the aler t to law 
enforcement. 
4. DSS should continue to work with USDA and law enforcement to promptly remove and 
confiscate identified or suspected skimming devices. 
5. DSS should continue their ongoing work of early skimming detection and analytics, 
informing the public of the risks and the necessary precautions, including via distribution 
of flyers and public seminars.  
 
                                                        
38 United States Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Services, SNAP EBT Modernization, 
https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/ebt/modernization, (Last visited August 21, 2025) 