more 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
JOCELYN E. STRAUBER 
COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE Release #50-2025 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 18, 2025 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
    
DOI ISSUES REPORT EXAMINING CITY CONFLICTS OF INTEREST BOARD’S INTERPRETATION OF 
THE CITY’S MOONLIGHTING RESTRICTIONS AND TRANSPARENCY OF COIB’S ADVISORY OPINIONS 
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Investigation (“DOI”), 
issued a Report today that examines the New York City Conflict of Interest Board’s (COIB) apparent position 
that the “moonlighting restrictions” in the City’s Conflicts of Interest Law (“Chapter 68”), which generally 
prohibit full-time City employees from having second jobs with firms that do business with the City, do not 
apply to City-employed attorneys who seek to serve as outside counsel to entities with City  business. DOI 
was prompted to explore this issue after learning that COIB  issued an advisory opinion to First Deputy 
Mayor Randy Mastro, which determined that Mastro would not violate Chapter 68 by continuing to serve as 
an outside attorney to the Madison Square Garden Group (“MSG”) in a lawsuit against a former New York 
Knicks player.  
 
DOI is unaware of any legal authority supporting COIB’s view and found that COIB overlooked the 
law’s “moonlighting restrictions” in its advisory opinion issued to First Deputy Mayor Mastro. COIB  takes 
the position that its advisory opinions are confidential; DOI obtained a copy of the advisory opinion issued 
to Mastro from City Hall and is independently confirming the letter’s existence for the first time in this Report. 
Although COIB had the authority to permit Mastro to continue representing MSG while serving as First 
Deputy Mayor, it is DOI’s position, supported by the plain language of Chapter 68,  that the law requires 
COIB to do so via public waiver. Such a waiver, which would be issued upon a finding that the 
representation technically violated the law’s moonlighting restrictions but did not conflict with the City ’s 
interests, would have publicly disclosed both: (1) the terms  of the attorney/client relationship between 
Mastro and MSG and (2) COIB’s permission for the arrangement. Instead, COIB issued what it considered 
to be a  confidential advice letter to Mastro and, when it received a press inquiry about its “clearance” of 
Mastro’s representation, said it could not respond because of City confidentiality laws. 
 
DOI did not, and is not, investigating Mastro’s representation of MSG, which he continued only after 
obtaining COIB’s permission. Mastro was entitled to rely on the advice he received from COIB, even though 
DOI believes that the advice was legally flawed. A copy of the Report is attached to this release and can 
also be found here: https://www.nyc.gov/site/doi/newsroom/public-reports-current.page  
 
DOI Commissioner Jocelyn E. Strauber said, “New York City’s Conflicts of Interest Law impacts 
City employees at every level, including those in the most senior City government positions. Based on an 
examination of one COIB advisory opinion involving the City’s second highest ranking executive, DOI found 
that COIB’s interpretation of the law is inconsistent with the plain language of Chapter 68, as well as certain 
prior decisions of the COIB concerning the law’s moonlighting restrictions.  DOI also found that Chapter 68 
requires that COIB make its advisory opinions public, in redacted form, and that COIB’s lack of transparency 
in failing to do so undermines public confidence in COIB’s determinations and limits information available 
to City employees about the rules that govern their conduct. DOI has made five recommendations that we 
urge COIB to accept and implement.” 
 
DOI also found that COIB  does not comply with Chapter 68’s requirement to publish its advisory 
opinions in redacted form. (Advisory opinions are distinct from waivers , which must be published without 

2 
 
redactions, because advisory opinions do not give employees permission to engage in conduct that would 
otherwise violate the law .) Even if COIB had properly determined that First Deputy Mayor Mastro’s 
relationship with MSG did not violate the law’s moonlighting restrictions, COIB should have released a 
redacted advisory opinion disclosing its legal  analysis. Such a publication would have notified the public 
that COIB does not consider outside attorneys to be subject to Chapter 68’s moonlighting restrictions. But 
COIB did not comply with the statutory requirement to publish a redacted opinion  in this case, and in fact 
has not done so since 2018 despite having issued hundreds of written advisory opinions since then. 
 
COIB’s questionable interpretation of the law effectively relieves it of the requirement to issue public 
waivers when it authorizes City -employed attorneys to act as outside counsel to private firms with City 
business. This , combined with COIB’s  failure to comply with the law’s  publication requirement for its 
advisory opinions, poi nt to an overarching concern that COIB is operating in a less transparent manner 
than Chapter 68 envisions. Indeed, the fact that COIB cleared the First Deputy Mayor  to serve as an 
attorney for a powerful local business interest was revealed for the first time only in the press  and due to 
litigation. COIB’s advice to Mastro is particularly significant because Mastro, like any senior City Hall official, 
has broad authority with respect to City matters that in theory could be beneficial to the client he was 
authorized to represent. 
 
In connection with this Report, DOI is issuing  the following Policy and Procedure 
Recommendations: 
 
1. COIB should review the advice it gave to First Deputy Mayor Mastro concerning his ongoing 
legal representation of MSG to ensure that such advice is consistent with Chapter 68’s 
moonlighting restrictions. If COIB determines that its advice was incorrect, COIB should amend 
its advice, and should issue a waiver to Mastro if COIB determines that a waiver is appropriate. 
 
2.  COIB shoul d review its previously -issued advisory opinions to determine whether it has 
permitted any other City -employed attorneys to represent  private firms with City business. If 
COIB has issued such opinions and the relevant conduct remains ongoing, COIB should r e-
consider that advice and, if  necessary, amend its advice and issue waivers to the relevant 
individuals if COIB determines that such waivers are appropriate. 
 
3.  In the alternative, if COIB  maintains that Chapter 68’s moonlighting restrictions apply 
exclusively to in- house (not external) attorneys to firms with  City business, it should issue a 
formal rule to that effect.  
 
4.  COIB should publish waivers pursuant to Charter Section 2604(e)  on its  website, so that 
members of the public do not need to submit FOIL requests to view them. The waivers should 
be published in a searchable format comparable to how COIB publishes its enforcement 
dispositions. 
 
5.  COIB should comply with Charter Section 2603(c)(3) ’s requirement to publish its advisory 
opinions, including the March 2025 op inion issued to First Deputy  Mayor Mastro, either by 
publishing the opinions with redactions or, if the required redactions would be so 
comprehensive as to deprive the opinions of  any practical value, by publishing summaries of 
the opinions that omit the identity of involved parties. 
 
The examination was conducted by DOI Inspectors General Audrey Feldman and Eleonora Rivkin 
who were supervised by Deputy Commissioner of Legal Affairs and General Counsel Andrew Brunsden,  
Deputy Commissioner of Strategic Initi atives Christopher Ryan, and Deputy Commissioner/Chief of 
Investigations Dominick Zarrella.   
 
DOI is one of the oldest law-enforcement agencies in the country and New York City’s corruption watchdog. Investigations 
may involve any agency, officer, elected official or employee of the City, as well as those who do business with or receive benefits 
from the City. DOI’s strategy attacks corruption comprehensively through systemic investigations that lead to high-impact arrests, 
preventive internal controls and operational reforms that improve the way the City runs. 
 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
 
  
 
New York City 
Department of Investigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber 
Commissioner 
 
Audrey Feldman 
Inspector General for the NYC Conflicts of Interest Board 
 
DECEMBER 2025 
 
Report on the New York City Conflicts of 
Interest Board’s Advisory Opinion and 
Moonlighting Waiver Practices 
COIB ADVICE REPORT DECEMBER 2025 
 
 
 
Table of Contents
 
 
I. Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................... 1 
II. Findings ........................................................................................................................................................ 5 
A. Background ............................................................................................................................................... 5 
B. Chapter 68’s Transparency Framework ...................................................................................................... 6 
C. The Board’s Advice to First Deputy Mayor Mastro ...................................................................................... 8 
D. Other Issues Addressed by DOI’s Review ................................................................................................ 11 
III. Conclusion .................................................................................................................................................. 12 
IV. Recommendations ....................................................................................................................................... 12 
 
 
  
  
 
COIB ADVICE REPORT DECEMBER 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 1  
 
I. Executive Summary 
The New York City Conflicts of Interest Board  (“COIB” or the “Board”) is an 
independent agency that interprets and enforces the City’s Conflicts of Interest Law, 
codified at Chapter 68 of the City Charter. The law seeks to prevent situations where 
a public servant’s private interests could influence their official decisions, to ensure 
public confidence that City officials are acting with the City’s best interests in mind, 
and to avoid misuse of public resources for personal benefit. The Board consists of 
five appointed members and relies on a staff of approximately 20 full-time employees 
for its day-to-day work. 
The Board and its staff give advisory opinions (or simply  “advice”) to City 
employees regarding whether their planned  future conduct would comply with  
Chapter 68. If the Board determines that certain conduct would technically violate 
Chapter 68 but does not create an actual conflict of interest, the Board can issue a  
waiver allowing a City employee to proceed with conduct that would otherwise violate 
the law. A key distinction between the Board ’s advisory opinions and its waivers is 
that the Board has long treated its advice as entirely confidential, whereas the law 
requires the Board to make its waivers public.  So, if the Board determines that an 
employee’s proposed conduct would not violate the law, its advice to that effect 
remains private; if the Board determines that an employee’s proposed conduct would 
violate the law but decides to issue the employee a waiver, the Board’s waiver will be 
publicly available. 
On March 18, 2025, the Board issu ed an advisory opinion to then- incoming 
First Deputy Mayor Randy Mastro, who had until then been a partner in a private 
law firm. The Board’s letter to Mastro (hereinafter the “Mastro Advice Letter”) opined 
that Mastro would not violate Chapter 68 by continuing to  represent a longtime 
client, the Madison Square Garden group and its ownership (collectively “MSG”), for 
a limited period, in a lawsuit against a former New York Knicks player.  
In the Mastro Advice Letter, the Board concluded that “Mr. Mastro may 
continue to represent MSG” under certain “specific and limited circumstances,” 
including representations by Mastro that he would perform a limited amount of work 
for MSG while in office and that he would do so without compensation. The letter 
does not grant a waiver to Mastro; rather, the Board’s letter concludes that Mastro’s 
proposed course of conduct does not violate Chapter 68, such that no waiver is 
required. 
COIB ADVICE REPORT DECEMBER 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 2  
 
Shortly after the Board issued its advice , the New York Daily News reported 
that COIB had “cleared” the representation.1 COIB cited “city confidentiality laws” 
in refusing to confirm whether it had provided any advice to Mastro at all. 2 Mastro 
nevertheless confirmed in a public court filing dated April 4, 2025 that he had indeed 
received the Board’s approval to represent MSG and summarized the advice he 
received from the Board.
3 DOI thereafter requested and obtained  from City Hall  a 
copy of the Mastro Advice Letter. 
DOI found that the Board’s advice to Mastro overlooked Chapter 68’s broad 
restrictions on City employee “moonlighting”: holding a second job or position with a 
private company or organization that does business with  the City of New York. The 
applicable provision states that “no regular employee shall have an interest in a firm 
. . . engaged in business dealings with the city.”
4 The law defines “interest” to include 
holding a “position” “as an attorney, agent, broker or consultant to the firm.”5 While 
the law is not a model of clarity, the plain language of the statute prohibits any full-
time City employee (including First Deputy Mayor Mastro) from holding a position 
as an attorney to a privately-held firm with City business dealings (such as MSG). 
In advising Mastro that his continued representation of MSG would not violate 
Chapter 68, the Board did not address the moonlighting restrictions quoted above. 
Instead, the Board considered several other provisions of Chapter 68 that could be 
implicated by Mastro’s representation of MSG and provided advice that would allow 
him to undertake the representation without violating those provisions. The Board’s 
failure to address the moonlighting restrictions in the Mastro Advice Letter implies 
that the Board found Mastro’s proposed representation did not violate those 
restrictions.  
                                                        
1 Chris Sommerfeldt, Randy Mastro to Remain MSG Lawyer While Mayor Adams’ Top Deputy, 
Sparking Concern, NY DAILY NEWS (Mar. 27, 2025), https://www.nydailynews.com/2025/03/27/randy-
mastro-remain-msg-lawyer-while-mayor-adams-top-deputy-sparking-concern/. 
2 Id. (“COIB Executive Director Carolyn Miller said [] city confidentiality laws preclude her from 
commenting on whether the board gave Mastro permission to stay on the MSG case. Miller noted 
that Mastro is free to disclose any advice the board may have given hi m.”) 
3 Letter from Randy M. Mastro to Hon. Richard J. Sullivan, Oakley v. MSG Networks, et al. , No. 17-
cv-6903 (RJS) (SDNY), Dkt. 352. The filing  was submitted in response to a motion by the plaintiff to 
disqualify Mastro from representing MSG based on his new City role. In the letter, Mastro wrote that 
he had submitted a declaration accompanying the request for advice  to the COIB in which he had 
“swor[n] ‘as a lawyer committed to meeting all of my ethical obligations,’ that [he] felt ‘compelled’” to 
continue representing MSG through the summary judgment phase of the litigation.  
4 City Charter Sections 2604(a)(1)(b), 2601(12), 2601(18); see also City Charter Section 2604(a)(6) 
(“[A] public servant shall be deemed to know of a business dealing with the city if such public servant 
should have known of such business dealing with the city.”). 
5 City Charter Section 2601(12), (18). 
COIB ADVICE REPORT DECEMBER 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 3  
 
The Board’s advice to Mastro also raises the question of whether the Board has 
permitted any other City-employed attorneys to represent entities with City business 
unbeknownst to the public  – a question that DOI cannot answer because COIB will 
not produce its advisory opinions to us for that purpose.  DOI learned of the Board’s 
advisory opinion to Mastro  and was therefore able to explore the circumstances of 
that advice only because the content of the advice was made public, at least in part, 
by Mastro in connection wit h the litigatio n in which the Board authorized him to 
represent MSG.  
DOI understands COIB ’s position to be that the moonlighting restrictions  
apply only to in-house attorneys employed by entities who do business with the City, 
but not to outside counsel w ho are retained by such entities . DOI is unaware of any 
authority that supports such a distinction. While an agency’s interpretation of its own 
enabling law carries great weight, the Board’s conclusion that City employees can act 
as outside attorneys to fi rms with City business  without a waiver contravenes the 
literal text of the law, relevant legislative history, and past guidance issued by COIB 
itself. The Board’s position also undermines the public’s reasonable expectations of 
transparency regarding the outside activities of City -employed attorneys, at least to 
the extent those outside activities involve clients with City business.  Should COIB 
persist in its interpretation, at a minimum it should engage in rulemaking to 
formalize a position that contradicts the plain language of the statute. 
Although DOI agrees that COIB had the authority to permit Mastro’s ongoing 
representation of MSG, the Board would have had to do so via public waiver (rather 
than via a private advice letter). Specifically,  the law allows  COIB to grant City 
employees public “moonlighting waivers” if the Board determines that a moonlighting 
arrangement prohibited by Chapter 68 “would not be in conflict with the purposes 
and interests of the City.”
6  
As a result , the Board’s determination  (which in DOI’s view is legally 
questionable) that Mastro’s representation of MSG would not violate Chapter 68’s 
moonlighting restrictions effectively hid the Board’s permission for Mastro to engage 
in that representation from the public. This is because the Board’s determination that 
Mastro’s conduct would not violate the law allowed the Board to style its permission 
as a private “advice letter” rather than as a public waiver.  
Even if the Board had properly determined that Mastro’s representation of 
MSG would not violate Chapter 68, DOI found that the Board should have at a 
minimum released an anonymized summary of its legal opinion to the public. Chapter 
                                                        
6 City Charter Section 2604(e).  Alternatively, the Board could have issued an advisory opinion to 
Mastro determining that his conduct would violate the law and declining to issue him a waiver.  
 
COIB ADVICE REPORT DECEMBER 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 4  
 
68 requires the Board to “make public its advisory opinions with such deletions as 
may be necessary to prevent disclosure of the identity of any public servant or other 
involved party.”
7 
Despite this requirement, in recent years COIB has taken the position that its 
advisory opinions are completely confidential because they are subject to the law’s 
requirement that COIB’s “records, reports, memoranda and files” remain confidential 
unless otherwise specified.8 DOI believes this reading improperly overlooks the law’s 
separate publication requirement that applies specifically to the Board’s advisory 
opinions. 
To be clear, DOI  is not investigating First Deputy Mayor Mastro ’s 
representation of MSG, which he continued only after obtaining COIB’s permission. 
Mastro was entitled to rely on the advice he received from the Board.9 DOI is focused 
only on the plausibility of COIB’s conclusion that Chapter 68 did not prohibit Mastro’s 
position as outside counsel to MSG  (and derivatively, that Mastro did not need a  
public waiver to engage in the representation). DOI also takes no position on whether 
it would have been appropriate for the Board to issue Mastro a public waiver to 
permit his representation of MSG under the circumstances.  
More detailed explanations of DOI’s findings are laid out below.  DOI is also 
issuing policy and procedure recommendations (“PPRs”) to COIB. Specifically, DOI is 
recommending that the Board either revise the advice it gave to Mastro (and any 
other similarly -situated employees) or formalize via rulemaking  its position that 
outside attorneys are not subject to Chapter 68’s moonlighting restricti ons. DOI is 
also recommending that the Board comply with Chapter 68’s publication requirement 
for its advisory opinions, which would entail publishing the advice it issued to Mastro 
in redacted form . Finally, DOI is recommending  that the Board make its pub lic 
waivers more easily accessible. 
A visual summary of the process for seeking COIB moonlighting waivers 
and/or advisory opinions is included as Appendix A to this Report. 
                                                        
7 City Charter Section 2603(c)(3). 
8 City Charter Section 2603(k). 
9 See City Charter Section 2603(c)(2) (“A public servant whose conduct or action is the subject of an 
advisory opinion [issued by COIB] shall not be subject to penalties or sanctions by virtue of acting or 
failing to act due to a reasonable reliance on the opinion.”). 
 
COIB ADVICE REPORT DECEMBER 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 5  
 
II. Findings 
A. Background 
COIB Advisory Opinions 
The law requires the Board to  issue advisory opinions upon the request of a 
City employee regarding whether the employee’s “proposed future conduct or action” 
would comply with Chapter 68. 10 COIB generally refers to its advisory opinions as 
“advice” (or historically, “legal advice”). 
COIB’s advice takes three forms:11 
1. “Attorney-of-the-Day” Advice : The overwhelming majority of requests for 
advice are answered by COIB’s “Attorney -of-the-Day” service, where COIB 
staff attorneys provide same -day responses to emails, calls, or public web 
portal submissions from City employees. COIB documents its informal advice 
in “call logs” but does not share with advice-seekers any written record of the 
advice provided. 
2. “S taff Letters”: COIB staff attorneys occasionally answer requests through 
“Staff Advice Letters” when a “question is a bit more complicated, or if the 
public servant wants or needs a more formal response.”12 
3. “Board Letters”: The full five-member Conflicts of Interest Board may provide 
“Board Advice Letters” for questions that are “complex, novel, or sensitive.”13 
The Board receives analysis and recommendations from its staff attorneys  
before issuing such letters.14 
                                                        
10 City Charter Section 2603(c). 
11 See generally N.Y.C. Conflicts of Interest Bd., 2024 Annual Report (hereinafter “2024 Annual 
Report”), p. 5-7. COIB published its 2024 Annual Report in mid-2025, after DOI inquired about the 
distinction between “formal” and “informal” advice in COIB’s earlier annual reports, which referred to 
those terms but did not define them. See N.Y.C. Conflicts of Interest Bd., 2023 Annual Report, p. 5 -6. 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/coib/downloads/pdf2/annual_reports/2023-nyc-coib-annual-report.pdf; 
N.Y.C. Conflicts of Interest Bd., 2022 Annual Report, p. 7 -8, 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/coib/downloads/pdf2/annual_reports/2022-nyc-coib-annual-report.pdf. 
12 2024 Annual Report p. 5. 
13 Id. 
14 Id. 
 
COIB ADVICE REPORT DECEMBER 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 6  
 
Chapter 68’s Moonlighting Restrictions and COIB Moonlighting Waivers 
Chapter 68 includes a blanket “moonlighting ” prohibition barring full-time 
City employees from having an “interest” in a private ly-held firm “engaged in 
business dealings with the City.” 15 The law specifies  that an “interest” includes a 
“position” with a firm, and that a “position” includes acting as “an attorney, agent, 
broker, or consultant to the firm.”16 
The law literally prohibits many secondary employment  or contractual  
arrangements that do not pose a substantive conflict of interest, especially when the 
moonlighting employee does not exercise policy discretion  in their City government 
position and/or the second employer does  business with City agencies but not with 
the employee’s City agency. In those circumstances, COIB can issue waivers allowing 
employees to engage in otherwise- prohibited moonlighting, provided that: (a) the 
head of the employee’s agency approves it ; and (b) the Board determines  that the 
moonlighting “would not be in conflict with the purposes and interests of the City.”17  
The law requires th e Board to issue its waivers in writing and to make them 
public.18 Notably, the Board has no authority to issue an advisory opinion to an 
employee clearing the employee to engage in conduct that would otherwise violate 
the law; rather, the Board must do so via public waiver.  In contrast, if the Board 
determines that the employee’s proposed conduct would not violate the law, or that it 
would violate the law and  cannot be waived, the Board  will issue the employee an 
advisory opinion to that effect (see Appendix A). 
B. Chapter 68’s Transparency Framework 
Chapter 68’s Requirement to Publish Redacted Advisory Opinions 
In contrast with its public moonlighting waivers, COIB has long maintain ed 
that its advisory opinions  are entirely protected from public disclosure  by the 
provision in Chapter 68 that makes the Board’s “records, reports, memoranda and 
files” confidential, “except as otherwise provided” by the law.19 While there may be 
benefits to keeping ethics advice confidential as a policy matter, in our view the law 
does not support COIB’s position.  
                                                        
15 City Charter Section 2604(a)(1)(b). 
16 City Charter Section 2601(12), (18). 
17 City Charter Section 2604(e). 
18 Id. 
19 City Charter Section 2603(k). 
 
COIB ADVICE REPORT DECEMBER 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 7  
 
Contrary to COIB’s longstanding practice, the law requires COIB to publish 
all its advisory opinions “with such deletions as may be necessary to prevent 
disclosure of the identity of any public servant or involved party.” 20 COIB has 
suggested that this non-disclosure requirement calls for redactions so extensive that 
the published opinions would be without practical value  in all cases .21 DOI cannot 
meaningfully assess the merits of this somewhat sweeping position without access to 
the opinions themselves. 
Notably, however, COIB regularly published anonymized advisory opinions  
issued to individual employees (including several high-ranking officials) throughout 
the 1990s into the early 2000s.22 The Board also occasionally  sought and obtained 
waivers of confidentiality where the official was so prominent that the  Board could 
not effectively anonymize its advice. 23 Moreover, a recent appellate c ourt decision 
questioned whether the law treats  COIB’s external communications , including 
communications with senior City officials,  as confidential at all (though it did not 
address advisory opinions specifically ).24 COIB also regularly discloses its advice to 
DOI in the event of an  investigation into alleged violations of Chapter 68 by the 
advice-seeking employee, and publicly discloses its advice if DOI substantiates a 
finding that the employee disregarded it.25 
                                                        
20 City Charter Section 2603(c)(3). 
21 See 2024 Annual Report, p.5. 
22 See, e.g. , COIB, Advisory Opinion 2001-1 ( Application of Ban on Political Fundraising by 
Policymakers to Case Where the  Policymaker Is the Candidate ); Advisory Opinion 98 -10 (Pro Bono  
Legal Services to Community School Board); 94-11 (Agency Head Owns Real Property in the City). 
23 See, e.g. , COIB, Advisory Opinion 2007- 4 (Financial Interests of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg); 
Advisory Opinion 2012- 1 (Financial Interests of Deputy Mayor Robert K. Steel); Advisory Opinion 
2000-3 (Police Commissioner’s Endorsement of Book Supporting the Police Museum) ; Advisory 
Opinion 96-2 (Position of HHC President Marcos at NYU Medical School). 
24 See Matter of New York Times Co. v. City of New York Off. of the Mayor, 194 A.D.3d 157, 163 (App. 
Div. 1st Dep’t 2021) (“Section 2603(k) provides confidentiality to the Board's own work product and 
files as it goes about its sensitive work of investigating and adjudicating ethics complaints. However, 
when those records are transmitted to other governmental agencies and are no longer in the sole 
possession of the Board, confidentiality under section 2603(k) ceases to apply to those records.”). 
25 Specifically, if DOI’s investigation substantiates the allegation, and COIB files an enforcement 
action, the resulting public disposition generally references and describes the advice that the employee 
received. See, e.g. , In re David Jimenez , Enf’t Disposition No. 2021- 429, COIB (2021), 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/coib/downloads/pdf4/enf-dis/2021-429.pdf; In re Michael Bobick , Enf’t 
Disposition No. 2019- 385, COIB (2020), https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/coib/ downloads/pdf4/enf-
dis/2019-385.pdf; I n re Wilfredo Vega , Enf’t Disposition No. 2016- 090, COIB (2017), 
https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/coib/downloads/pdf4/enf-dis/2019-385.pdf. COIB may also account for an 
employee’s failure to heed its advice by increasing its financial penalty assessment. 
 
COIB ADVICE REPORT DECEMBER 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 8  
 
Moonlighting Advice Versus Moonlighting Waivers 
The result of COIB’s overall approach (visualized in Appendix A) is that the 
public can obtain COIB’s moonlighting waivers but not its advisory opinions.26 As a 
result, only those determinations that an employee’s proposed course of conduct does 
violate the law, requiring a waiver, are made public, while those determinations that 
an employee’s proposed course of conduct does not violate the law, and thus does not 
require a waiver, remain private. 
The Board’s failure to publish its redacted advisory opinions as required by law 
effectively conceals the Board’s reasoning for permitting public officials to engage in 
conduct that at the very least raises a potential Chapter 68 violation , at least in 
certain cases. There is no question that First Deputy Mayor Mastro’s representation 
of MSG (which we discuss in detail below) raises such a potential violation. When the 
advisory opinion involves a senior public official  seeking a secondary position, there 
is heightened public interest in the implications of that person’s ability to hold such 
employment and the basis for permitting it, but COIB’s current practices deny the 
public basic awareness of the Board’s positions on those issues. Indeed, the fact that 
the First Deputy Mayor obtained COIB’s permission to serve as an attorney for a 
powerful local business interest was revealed for the first time only in the press. This 
sort of permission is of particular significance because Mastro, like any senior City 
Hall official, has broad authority with respect to City matters that in theory could be 
beneficial to his client.  
C. The Board’s Advice to First Deputy Mayor Mastro 
 
The Mastro Advice Letter 
 The Mastro Advice Letter recounts that Mayor Eric Adams contacted COIB 
shortly before Mastro’s appointment in March 2025 “‘requesting advice as to whether, 
in accordance with [Chapter 68], Randy Mastro may continue to represent [MSG]” in 
                                                        
26 As noted above, Charter Section 2604(e) requires moonlighting waivers to be “made public by the 
board.” Yet COIB’s website directs visitors to submit a Freedom of Information Law (“FOIL”) request 
to view past waivers. See N.Y.C. Conflicts of Interest Bd., Waivers, N.Y.C. Gov., 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/coib/public-documents/waivers.page (last visited Sept. 3, 2025). In contrast, 
the Board publishes its enforcement dispositions, which the law similarly requires “shall be made 
public,” in searchable format on its webpage. See Charter Section 2603(h)(4), N.Y.C. Conflicts of 
Interest Bd., Enforcement Dispositions and Fines, N.Y.C. Gov., https://www.nyc.gov/site/coib/public-
documents/enforcement-dispositions.page ( last visited Sept.  3, 2025). It is not clear why the Board 
conditions access to its waivers (but not its enforcement decisions) on the public’s willingness to 
make an application that is then subject to review and a determination by COIB as to whether the 
waiver is disclosable under FOIL. 
COIB ADVICE REPORT DECEMBER 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 9  
 
an ongoing case  involving civil claims brought by former New York Knicks player 
Charles Oakley over his removal from MSG in 2017. 
According to the letter, Mastro sought to be involved in the summary judgment 
phase of the litigation in a limited capacity following his appointment as First Deputy 
Mayor. Specifically, Mastro sought to appear at a court conference scheduled for April 
2025, and to review a final draft of the briefs supporting an anticipated motion by 
MSG for summary judgment. Mastro represented that he would make all 
appearances in his individual capacity (not in association with his former law firm), 
and that he would not be compensated for any w ork on the case following his City 
appointment. 
The Board ultimately concluded that “u nder these specific and limited 
circumstances . . . Mr. Mastro may continue to represent MSG”  provided he fully 
recused himself from “any matter involving MSG” while in office.  Significantly, 
however, the Mastro Advice Letter failed to address whether Mastro’s ongoing 
representation of MSG would violate Chapter 68’s moonlighting restrictions , which 
would h ave triggered the need for a waiver . Rather, the letter mainly addressed 
whether the representation would violate a separate provision of the law that 
prohibits public servants from using their City position to benefit a firm with which 
they are associated. On that point, the Board concluded that Mastro’s representation 
would not in itself constitute use of his City position to benefit MSG, a conclusion that 
we do not take issue with.  
Chapter 68 Facially Prohibits Mastro’s Representation of MSG 
The Mastro Advice Letter’s failure to consider whether Mastro’s proposed 
conduct would violate Chapter 68 ’s moonlighting restrictions  is difficult to 
understand. Mastro’s role as counsel to MSG, a private firm  with City business 
dealings, facially violates the law’s requirement that “no regular employee shall” hold 
a “position” including “as an attorney” with “a [privately -held] firm which such 
regular employee knows is engaged in business dealings with the city.”
27 His conduct 
also falls outside the scope of the law’s safe harbor exception, which permits city 
servants to act as pro-bono counsel to nonprofit entities provided that the entity “has 
no business dealings with the city agency in which the public servant is employed”: 
MSG is a for-profit entity and has business dealings with the executive branch of City 
government.28  
                                                        
27 City Charter Sections 2604(a)(1)(b), 2601(12), 2601(18); see also City Charter Section 2604(a)(6) 
(“[A] public servant shall be deemed to know of a business dealing with the city if such public servant 
should have known of such business dealing with the city.”). 
28 See Section 2604(b)(5) (“For the purposes of this subdivision, the agency served by . . .  a public 
servant who is deputy mayor . . . shall be the executive branch of the city government.”).  
COIB ADVICE REPORT DECEMBER 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 10  
 
In other words,  the Board ’s advice to First Deputy Mayor Mastro  was not 
consistent with Chapter 68’s moonlighting restrictions or any prior interpretation of 
those restrictions of which we are aware.  (As noted above, DOI takes no position on  
whether the Board could or should have issued Mastro a waiver pursuant to a finding 
that Mastro’s representation of MSG would not pose  a substantive conflict of 
interest.) 
DOI understands COIB to take the position  that an individual acting as an 
outside attorney for a client -firm generally does not qualif y as holding a “position” 
with that firm under the law , even though the law expressly defines the term 
“position” to include acting “as an attorney, agent, broker, or consultant to the firm.” 
Rather, COIB believes the provision applies only to in -house attorneys employed 
directly by the firm. COIB cited no authority for this interpretation.29  
The law’s drafting also undercuts COIB’s view. T he relevant text groups 
attorneys together with a variety of outside agents to entities with City business when 
it states that a “position” with a firm includes acting as “an attorney, agent, broker, 
or consultant to the firm.”30 Legislative history further clarifies that the definition of 
position was written to encompass an “array of relationships from employees to 
consultants,”31 and thus should not be read to exclude non-employees. The existence 
of the law’s  safe harbor  exception (which delineates the specific , limited  
circumstances in which public servants may serve as outside attorneys to non-profit 
entities with City business dealings) further undermines COIB’s reading.32  
COIB’s current position also conflicts with previous guidance issued by the 
Board itself. Specifically, in a 1991  public guidance document, the Board wrote that 
“public servants who are attorneys may engage in the private practice of law during 
their off-duty hours, provided that . . . their practices are conducted in compliance 
                                                        
29 COIB appears to be of the view that applying the law as written would be impracticable because 
numerous attorneys in private practice serve on various City boards and commissions, and thus 
regularly represent client-firms with business before the City. However, it does not appear that 
waivers would be required for such attorneys in most cases given their part-time City employment 
status. This is because Chapter 68 prohibits part-time City employees only from holding positions 
with firms that have business dealings with those employees’ own City agencies. See Charter Section 
2604(a)(1)(b). Even if waivers were required, the Board could simply grant them. 
30 City Charter Section 2601(18). 
31 New York City Charter Revision Commission 1998 Report Volume Two: Section -by-Section 
Analysis of Proposals 153 (Apr. 1989) (explaining the meaning of “position” in Chapter 68, § 
2601(18)). 
32 See also  COIB, Advisory Opinion 2001- 3 (Outside Practice of Law) (2001), available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/coib/downloads/pdf5/aos/2000-2003/AO2001_3.pdf (elaborating on the 
circumstances in which the safe harbor exception applies). 
 
COIB ADVICE REPORT DECEMBER 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 11  
 
with Chapter 68,” which “means that a public servant who is an attorney may not do 
private legal work for a person or firm which has b usiness dealings with the City .”33 
Although this guidance is old, DOI is unaware of any contrary authority. 
Finally, t he literal interpretation of the statute makes common sense: 
Attorneys have a fiduciary duty of loyalty to the clients they represent, which in many 
cases could be in tension with an attorney’s duty, as a City employee, to act in the 
best interests of the City when their client has City business or an interest in the 
outcome of City policymaking. 
In short, COIB’s interpretation contradicts both  the plain language of the 
statute and the Board’s own public statements. If COIB  wishes to persist with this 
interpretation, DOI is recommending that it undertake formal rulemaking and  
subject its view to notice and comment.  
The Board Failed to Comply with Statutory Requirements to Make Its Analysis Public 
Regardless of whether the Board properly concluded that Mastro’s conduct 
would not implicate Chapter 68’s moonlighting restrictions, the Board failed to 
comply with statutory requirements to make its  (in our view questionable ) legal 
analysis public. As discussed in further detail above,  the law requires the Board to 
publish its advisory opinions in redacted form, something that the Board failed to do 
in this case – and has generally failed to do for a long time. 
Alternatively, if the Board determined, in co nsultation with City Hall, that 
Mastro’s proposed representation of MSG technically violated the law but would not 
conflict with the City’s interests , the Board could have issued Mastro a public 
moonlighting waiver. It might have been reasonable for the Board to do this: Mastro 
says he is no longer receiving compensation for his legal services to MSG, the scope 
of his contemplated ongoing representation appears narrow, and he has agreed to 
recuse himself from matters involving MSG that come before him at City Hall.  
As noted above, though, the Board would need to publish such a waiver without 
redactions and thereby subject its decision  and reasoning  to public scrutiny , 
particularly given MSG’s significance within New York City.  
D. Other Issues Addressed by DOI’s Review 
 
DOI’s review also raised  concerns with respect to : (1) the lack of public  
information regarding the different types of “formal” and “informal” advice that the 
Board issues, and (2) COIB’s longstanding practice of calling its advisory opinions 
                                                        
33 COIB, Advisory Opinion 91- 7 (1991), available at  
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/coib/downloads/pdf5/aos/AO91_07.pdf (emphasis added). 
COIB ADVICE REPORT DECEMBER 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 12  
 
“legal advice,” which DOI believes could mislead advice-seekers as to the nature and 
confidentiality of their communications with Board -employed attorneys. DOI raised 
these issues with the Board, and it has taken steps to  remediate them in its 2024 
Annual Report34 and with changes to its website, which now simply refers to “advice” 
(rather than “legal advice”) and describes the different formats of advice available.35 
III. Conclusion 
  
COIB regularly tells  recipients of its public warning  letters that “precise 
compliance with [Chapter 68] avoids even the appearance of impropriety and helps 
to strengthen public confidence in City officials.” The same agency issued a non-public 
advisory opinion permitting the City’s second highest-ranking executive to maintain 
a fiduciary relationship with one of the City’s major landowners and business 
interests. The Board’s finding that Mastro’s representation of MSG would not violate 
Chapter 68  contradicts the plain text of the statute and , combined with COIB’s 
longstanding failure to publish its redacted advisory opinions as the law requires, has 
the effect of shielding the Board’s questionable legal reasoning from public view. Had 
the Board instead interpreted the law as it is literally written and issued Mastro a 
moonlighting waiver, it would have had to make its decision public. The Board’s lack 
of transparency in this space risks jeopardizing public confidence in the Board’s 
determinations as to the senior -most public servants, where the Board’s ability to 
apply Chapter 68 equitably and fairly is of particular importance. 
The Board’s advice to Mastro raises  other questions : First,  h as the Board 
permitted any othe r City -employed attorneys to represent private for -profit firms 
with City business pursuant to the same interpretation of the law ? Second, has the 
Board permitted any other high-ranking public officials to engage in conduct that  
facially violates Chapter 68 pursuant to other interpretations? DOI cannot 
investigate these questions because COIB will not produce its advisory opinions to us 
for that purpose. 
IV. Recommendations 
  
DOI agrees with the changes that the Board  has already implemented  in 
response to DOI’s review, particularly the changes to COIB’s website concerning its 
advice practices.  
 
                                                        
34 2024 Annual Report, p. 5 -7, https://www.nyc.gov/assets/coib/downloads/pdf2/annual_reports/2024-
nyc-coib-annual-report.pdf. 
35 See N.Y.C. Conflicts of Interest Bd., Get Legal Advice, N.Y.C. Gov.,  
https://www.nyc.gov/site/coib/contact/get-legal-advice.page (last visited Sept. 3, 2025). 
COIB ADVICE REPORT DECEMBER 2025 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 13  
 
DOI’s findings point to an overarching concern that the Board is operating in 
a less transparent manner than Chapter 68 contemplates, highlighting  the tension 
between the need for COIB to conduct its work confidentially and the need for 
independent oversight over all City agencies , including COIB. For this reason, DOI 
would also support legislation granting DOI access to  the Board’s otherwise -
confidential documents for the purpose of investigating COIB’s policies and practices. 
 
Finally, DOI makes the following Policy and Procedure Recommendations: 
 
1. COIB should review the  advice it gave to First Deputy Mayor Mastro 
concerning his ongoing legal representation of MSG to ensure that such advice 
is consistent with Chapter 68’s moonlighting restrictions. If COIB determines 
that its advice was incorrect, COIB should amend its advice, and should issue 
a waiver to Mastro if COIB determines that a waiver is appropriate. 
 
2. COIB should review its previously -issued advisory opinions to determine 
whether it has permitted any other City -employed attorneys to represent 
private firms with City business. If the Board has issued such opinions and the 
relevant conduct remains ongoing, COIB should re-consider that advice and, if 
necessary, amend its advice  and issue waivers to the re levant individuals if 
COIB determines that such waivers are appropriate. 
 
3. In the alternative, if the Board maintains  that Chapter 68’s moonlighting 
restrictions apply exclusively to in-house (not external) attorneys to firms with 
City business, it should issue a formal rule to that effect. 
 
4. COIB should publish waivers pursuant to Charter Section 2604(e) on its 
website, so that members of the public do not need to submit FOIL requests to 
view them. The waivers should be published in a searchable format comparable 
to how COIB publishes its enforcement dispositions. 
 
5. COIB should comply with Charter Section 2603(c)(3)’s requirement to publish 
its advisory opinions, including the March 2025 opinion issued to First Deputy 
Mayor Mastro,  either by publishing the opinions with redac tions or , if the 
required redactions would be so comprehensive as to deprive the opinions of 
any practical value, by  publishing summaries of the opinions that omit the 
identity of involved parties. 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX A 
Summary of COIB Moonlighting Advice and Waivers 
 
 
Employee seeks input from COIB 
regarding proposed moonlighting
COIB finds violation of Chapter 68’s 
moonlighting restrictions
COIB finds proposed moonlighting 
would not “conflict with the purpose 
and interest of the City,” and agency 
head approves the moonlighting
COIB issues a waiver to the 
employee.
Chapter 68 requires the Board to 
publish its unredacted waivers, but 
COIB currently requires the public to 
submit FOIL requests to view them.
COIB declines to waive the violation
COIB issues an Advisory Opinion telling 
the employee they cannot proceed.
Chapter 68 requires publication of 
Advisory Opinions with redactions, but 
COIB does not currently comply with this 
requirement.
COIB finds no violation of Chapter 
68’s moonlighting restrictions
COIB issues an Advisory Opinion 
allowing the employee to proceed.
Chapter 68 requires publication of 
Advisory Opinions with redactions, but 
COIB does not currently comply with this 
requirement.