more 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
JOCELYN E. STRAUBER 
COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE Release #02-2025 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 8, 2025 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
  
  
 
DOI REPORT FINDS EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF CITY BOARD OF ELECTIONS (BOE)  ENGAGED IN 
HARASSMENT AND CREATED HOSTILE WORK ENVIRONMENT FOR TWO EMPLOYEES  
—DOI also found BOE does not have an effective Equal Employment Opportunity program— 
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Investigation (“DOI”), 
issued a Report today following an investigation of allegations of workplace harassment made by a former 
BOE employee against Michael Ryan, Executive Director of the New York City Board of Elections (“BOE”). 
DOI undertook this investigation due to the risk that an agency cannot conduct an independent and impartial 
workplace harassment investigation of its Executive Director , and because DOI’s preliminary review 
indicated that BOE in particular lacked a sufficient process to do so. During the investigation, DOI was 
made aware of additional allegations that Ryan harassed a  second BOE employee. DOI’s investigation 
concluded that Ryan’s conduct constituted harassment and created a hostile work environment for these 
two employees in violation of  BOE’s Equal Employment Opportunity (“EEO”) policies. DOI also reviewed 
the BOE’s EEO Policy and found serious deficiencies that hinder the BOE’s ability to effectively prevent 
and address workplace misconduct and harassment, including but not limited to the incidents raised by the 
Complainants. DOI also determined that Ryan’s conduct more likely than not violated applicable State and 
City human rights laws. 
 
DOI referred its findings to the Board. While it is the Board’s responsibility to determine appropriate 
corrective or disciplinary action, DOI took the unusual step of informing the Board of DOI’s view that Ryan’s 
conduct was sufficiently serious, particularly in light of his leadership position, that termination or resignation 
in lieu of termination is warranted. The Board declined to terminate Ryan or to give him the opportunity to 
resign; instead, the Board suspended Ryan for three weeks without pay, directed him to attend sensitivity 
training offered by the City Department of Citywide Administrative Services ( “DCAS”), and placed him on 
probation for one year. DOI notes that Ryan most recently completed DCAS’s EEO and Sexual Harassment 
Prevention training courses on May 6, 2024, during the time period when the substantiated conduct 
occurred.  
 
DOI issued six policy and procedure recommendations to reform and strengthen the BOE’s EEO 
program. A copy of the Report follows this release and can be found at this link: 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/doi/newsroom/public-reports.page  
 
DOI Commissioner Jocelyn E. Strauber said, “After a thorough investigation, DOI concluded that 
BOE’s Executive Director harassed two BOE employees, creating a hostile work environment and leading 
one employee to resign . Equally concerning, DOI found BOE ’s Equal Employment Opportunity (“EEO”) 
policies and procedures se riously deficien t and to that end, DOI has made six recommendations to 
strengthen BOE’s EEO program and to provide more robust  protections for its employees. Effective EEO 

2 
 
policies promote a  diverse, inclusive and equitable workplace which is critical to an agency’s success . I 
strongly urge the BOE to immediately implement DOI’s recommendations.” 
 
BOE is a non -Mayoral City entity responsible for administering elections in New York City. It is 
overseen by an independent Board of Commissioners (“the Board”) established pursuant to Article 2, 
Section 8 of the New York State Constitution, as codified in  the New York State Election Law. The Board 
consists of ten commissioners, one Democrat and one Republican from each of the City’s five boroughs.  
The Executive Director, who reports to the Board, and his Executive Management team lead the BOE. The 
BOE has a staff of over 900 employees in its general office and five borough offices and employs numerous 
other part-time and temporary election workers. The Board of Commissioners are not City employees, but 
all other BOE staff, including the Executive Director, are City employees and are on the City’s payroll.  
 
Between August 2 and October 8, 2024, DOI conducted an investigation into allegations of 
workplace harassment by Ryan concerning a former BOE employee (“Complainant 1”), which was reported 
to DOI initially by a BOE Commissioner and separately by Complainant 1. Complainant 1 made numerous 
allegations that Ryan engaged in unwelcome behavior towards her or in her presen ce, over an 
approximately four-month period in 2024. The alleged behavior included comments that were either 
sexually suggestive, about a sexualized topic, or about Complainant 1’s appearance , some paired with 
inappropriate physical gestures . Some of the comments also centered around Complainant 1’s ethnicity 
and involved offensive stories and stereotypes about individuals of the same or similar heritage. Ryan’s 
conduct, in totality, caused Complainant 1 to experience significant anxiety and emotional distress, and 
ultimately contributed to her decision to resign  from her BOE position.  Complainant 2 did not proactively 
make a complaint of misconduct against Ryan to DOI. However, during her interview with DOI in connection 
with the investigation of Complainant 1’s allegations, Complainant 2 disclosed several incidents in which 
Ryan made ethnicity- and gender-based comments towards her or in her presence, which she stated were 
unwanted, unwelcome, and offensive.  
 
To the extent Ryan credibly asserted that he did not intend to harass the Complainant, neither the 
BOE’s EEO Policy, the Citywide EEO Policy, nor applicable law, requires that a harasser intend for his or 
her conduct to create a hostile work environment. In fact, harassing conduct based on a protected 
characteristic, including race, ethnicity, and gender, that has the purpose or effect of creating a hostile work 
environment, is prohibited. DOI found Ryan’s conduct particularly inappropriate in light of his executive 
leadership position at the BOE. 
 
DOI notes that DOI previously investigated and substantiated allegations of misconduct against the 
BOE’s former General Counsel Steven Richman. In that case, Richman misused his position by convincing 
an intern he supervised that he could help the intern obtain a job as a se curity guard at political events, if 
the intern could pass a so -called “physical fitness assessment” to be administered by Richman. This 
physical fitness assessment included measuring the intern’s body parts, placing the intern in wrestl ing 
holds, and having the intern place Richman in wrestling holds. Richman later performed a similar 
“assessment” on a second individual and took photos of the individual during the assessment. Richman’s 
wholly improper conduct, which resulted in a criminal conviction, is of course distinct from Ryan’s. 
Nonetheless, it is worth noting that th e allegations that prompted this investigation are the second set of 
substantiated allegations of which DOI is  aware that involve misconduct by a senior member of BOE 
leadership and that implicate the BOE’s EEO Poli cy and pose potential liability risks under applicable 
human rights laws. One instance of conduct of this nature would be too many and two such instances make 
clear the need for significant reforms to the BOE’s EEO program. 
 
DOI reviewed the BOE’s EEO Policy and interviewed 14 BOE personnel, including BOE 
commissioners and senior staff. DOI found Complainants 1 and 2 to be credible based on interviews of the 
Complainants in which they provided specific factual detail supportin g their allegations , as well as  
corroboration provided by other witnesses who learned of the incidents at issue  either roughly 
contemporaneously with their occurrence or after they occurred. Some witnesses also reported conduct by 
Ryan similar to those alleged by the Complainants, such as Ryan telling race - and ethnicity- based stories 
or jokes.  
 
During its investigation, DOI observed deficiencies in the BOE’s EEO Policy and related practices 
that hindered BOE’s ability to effectively prevent and address the incidents raised by the Complainants. 
3 
 
Specifically, the BOE’s EEO Policy lacked a confidential complaint mechanism or independent investigation 
protocol for allegations against its Executive Director and other senior staff. Additionally, unlike other City 
agencies, the BOE did not have an EEO Officer who handles routine EEO responsibilities independently of 
other senior staff , such as reviewing and evaluating complaints, conducting investigations, processing 
reasonable accommodation requests, and keeping a central repository or log of EEO activ ities, impacting 
not only the specific allegations that  DOI addresses in this Report , but the BOE’s ability to handle EEO 
complaints more generally. Individuals who DOI interviewed, including BOE Commissioners and senior 
BOE staff, were also confused as to the applicability of the Citywide EEO Policy to the BOE.  
 
These deficiencies send a message that BOE does not take these policies and its EEO obligations 
seriously and create risks including that staff may be unaware of the rules governing workplace behavior 
and that victims of harassment will not report their complaints. These deficiencies also effectively prevent 
proper and consistent handling of the BOE’s EEO responsibilities and pose legal risks  to the BOE, and to 
the City, in light of relevant Federal, State, and City human rights laws intended to prevent wor kplace 
harassment. Based on these findings, DOI issued six policy and procedure recommendations to reform and 
strengthen the BOE’s EEO program.  
 
Based on the findings described in this Report, DOI recommended that BOE should: 
 
1. Formally appoint a qualified EEO Officer who reports directly to both the Executive Director and the 
President of the Board of Commissioners, and properly staff the EEO Office with qualified professionals 
to perform all EEO responsibilities, including investigations. 
 
2. Communicate the identity and contact information of the EEO Officer and other EEO professionals, via 
email, posting on any internal intranet site, or other effective methods, to all BOE staff annually and at 
other appropriate intervals, such as when a new EEO Officer is appointed. 
 
3. Formally adopt the Citywide EEO Policy as BOE’s EEO Policy and, like the City’s mayoral agencies, 
follow DCAS’s guidance on proper implementation of the EEO Policy. BOE’s EEO Policy should 
include, at minimum: 
 
• A requirement that all supervisors and managers who receive an allegation or otherwise 
become aware of misconduct that violates the BOE’s EEO Policy refer such allegation to 
the EEO Officer for a confidential and independent investigation. 
 
• A requirement that, in the event such an allegation is against the Executive Director, the 
EEO Officer, or a BOE Commissioner, the EEO Officer or other supervisor or manager 
must refer the allegation to another City entity, such as DCAS or DOI, for indepen dent 
investigation.  
 
• A detailed procedure for investigation of EEO complaints which includes, among other 
things, confidentiality protocols to ensure the protection of complainants and witnesses, 
and a prohibition against retaliation for making a complaint or participating in an  
investigation. 
 
• A detailed procedure for other EEO functions, including submission and handling of 
reasonable accommodation requests and recordkeeping with respect to complaints, 
investigations, reasonable accommodations, and training. 
 
4. Train all BOE personnel, including Executive Management and BOE Commissioners, at regular 
intervals on the EEO Policy and sexual harassment prevention. 
 
5. Perform regular reporting to an external City entity, such as DCAS, with respect to EEO activities, 
including complaints, investigations, reasonable accommodations, and training.  
 
6. Formally subject itself to audits and oversight by the New York City Equal Employment Practices 
Commission. 
 
4 
 
 In response, the Board indicated it will “review and update its [EEO] policies and procedures in part 
based on DOI’s recommendation.” 
 
This investigation was conducted by Special Counsel to the Inspectors General Danielle Muniz and 
Associate General Counsel Anais Holland -Rudd and was supervised by Deputy Commissioner/ Chief 
Compliance and Privacy Officer & EEO  Officer Philip Hung, Deputy Commissioner of Legal Affairs and 
General Counsel Andrew Brunsden, Deputy Commissioner of Strategic Initiatives Christopher Ryan , and 
Deputy Commissioner/Chief of Investigations Dominick Zarrella. 
 
 
 
DOI is one of the oldest law-enforcement agencies in the country and New York City’s corruption watchdog. Investigations 
may involve any agency, officer, elected official or employee of the City, as well as those who do business with or receive benefits 
from the City. DOI’s strategy attacks corruption comprehensively through systemic investigations that lead to high-impact arrests, 
preventive internal controls and operational reforms that improve the way the City runs. 
 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
 
 
 
  
 
 
New York City 
Department of Investigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber 
Commissioner 
 
Philip Hung 
Deputy Commissioner 
 
 
January 2025 
 
Equal Employment Opportunity Policies and 
Practices at the New York City Board of 
Elections 
Board of Elections’ Equal Employment Opportunity Policies and Practices January 2025 
 
  
 
Table of Contents
 
 
I. Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................... 1 
II. Investigative Findings .................................................................................................................................... 2 
A. Harassment and Hostile Work Environment by Executive Director Michael Ryan ....................................... 2 
B. Deficiencies in BOE’s Policies and Procedures for Addressing EEO Matters .............................................. 4 
III. Recommendations ......................................................................................................................................... 8 
 
 
  
  
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 1  
 
I. Executive Summary 
The New York City Board of Elections (the “BOE”) is a non -Mayoral City entity 
responsible for administering elections in New York City. The BOE’s responsibilities 
include: voter registration; operating poll site locations; the dissemination of election 
information; and the processing and verification of candidate documents. The BOE is 
overseen by an independent Board of Commissioners (the “Board”) established 
pursuant to Article 2, Section 8 of the New York State Constitution, as codified in the 
New York State Election Law. The Board consists of ten commissioners, one 
Democrat and one Republican from each of the City’s five boroughs.  The BOE has a 
staff of over 900 employees in its general office and five borough offices and employs 
numerous other part -time and temporary election workers.  The BOE is led by its 
Executive Director, who reports to the Board, and his Executive Management team. 
The Board of C ommissioners are not City employees, but all other BOE staff, 
including the Executive Director, are City employees and are on the City’s payroll. 
Between August 2  and October 8, 2024, the New York City Department of 
Investigation (“DOI”)  conducted an investigation into allegations of workplace 
harassment by Executive Director Michael Ryan . The allegations were made by a 
former BOE employee (“Complainant 1”). DOI undertook this investigation because: 
(1) Ryan’s position as the head of the BOE created a risk that BOE could not conduct 
an independent and impartial investigation; and (2) DOI’s preliminary review of the 
BOE’s policies and procedures indicated that the BOE lacked a sufficient process to 
adequately address workplace harassment allegations  against the Executive 
Director. During DOI’s investigation, additional allegations  that Ryan harassed 
another BOE employee (“Complainant 2”) came to our attention. DOI’s investigation 
concluded that Ryan’s conduct constituted harassment and created a  hostile work 
environment for the complainants in  violation of BOE ’s Equal Employment 
Opportunity policy (“BOE’s EEO Policy”)1. DOI also determined that Ryan’s conduct 
more likely than not also violated applicable State and City human rights laws.  
During its investigation, DOI  observed deficiencies in  the BOE’s EEO Policy and 
related practices that hindered BOE’s ability to effectively prevent and address the 
incidents raised by the complainants . Specifically, the BOE’s EEO Policy lacked a 
confidential complaint mechanism or independent investigation protocol for 
allegations against its Executive Director and other senior staff. Additionally, unlike 
other City agencies, the BOE did not have an EEO Officer who performs routine EEO 
responsibilities independently of other senior staff, such as receiving and evaluating 
complaints, conducting investigations, processing reasonable accommodation 
requests, and keeping a central repository or log of EEO activities, impacting not only 
 
1 BOE’s EEO Policy is included in its Personnel Guidelines.  
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 2  
 
the specific allegations that we address here, but the BOE’s ability to handle EEO 
complaints more generally . Individuals who m DOI interviewed, including BOE 
Commissioners and senior BOE staff, were also confused as to the applicability of the 
Citywide EEO Policy to the BOE. These deficiencies send a message to BOE staff that 
BOE does not take its EEO -related obligations seriously, and create risks including 
that Staff may be unaware of the rules governing workplace behavior and that 
victims of harassment w ill not report their complaints. These deficiencies also 
effectively prevent proper and consistent handling of the BOE’s EEO responsibilities 
and pose legal risks to the BOE , and to the City, in light of relevant Federal, State, 
and City human rights laws intended to prevent workplace harassment.  
At the conclusion of its investigation in late 2024 , DOI provided a detailed 
confidential report of its factual findings concerning the conduct of Executive Director 
Ryan and BOE’s EEO policies and practices to the BOE Board of Commissioners, as 
well as several policy and procedure recommendations to reform and strengthen the 
BOE’s EEO program.  In light of the significant flaws in BOE’s EEO practices, as well 
as the misconduct of BOE’s Executive Director, DOI now issues this public report 
summarizing its findings.   
II. Investigative Findings 
A. Harassment and Hostile Work Environment by Executive Director Michael Ryan 
Complainant 1 made numerous allegations that Ryan engaged in  unwelcome 
behavior towards her or in her presence, over a three- to four-month period in 2024. 
The alleged behavior included comments that were either sexually suggestive, about 
a sexualized topic, or about Complainant 1’s  appearance – some paired with 
inappropriate physical gestures, such as puckering his lips and touching or 
attempting to touch Complainant 1’s face with his hand  – all of which were 
unwelcome and made her extremely uncomfortable. Some of the comments also 
centered around Complainant 1’s ethnicity  and involved  offensive stories and 
stereotypes about individuals of the same or similar heritage. In some instances, the 
ethnicity-based commentary was paired with gender-based and sexualized remarks, 
all of which made Complainant 1  feel that Ryan targeted her  due to her ethnic 
identity and that he was “grooming” her.  Ryan’s conduct, in totality, caused 
Complainant 1  to experience significant anxiety and emotional distress , and 
ultimately contributed to her decision to resign from her BOE position.  
 
Complainant 2 did not proactively make a complaint of misconduct against Ryan to 
DOI. However, during her interview with DOI in connection with the investigation of 
Complainant 1’s allegations , Complainant 2 disclosed several incidents in which 
Ryan made ethnicity- and gender-based comments towards her or in her presence , 
which she stated were unwanted, unwelcome, and offensive. The comments included 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 3  
 
stereotypical remarks about how individuals of her heritage behave or should behave, 
and comments that were based on a gender stereotype. Complainant 2  stated that 
she did not previously report the comments because she did not believe that there 
was a mechanism for her to do so effectively, and without risk of harm.  
 
DOI reviewed the BOE’s EEO Policy and interviewed 14 BOE personnel, including 
BOE commissioners and senior staff. DOI found Complainants 1 and 2 (collectively 
the “Complainants”) to be credible based on interviews of the Complainants in which 
they provided specific factual detail supporting their allegations and on the basis of 
corroboration provided by other witnesses who learned of some of the incidents at 
issue either roughly contemporaneously with or after they occurred. Some witnesses 
also reported conduct similar to those alleged by the Complainants, such as Ryan 
telling race - and ethnicity - based stories or jokes. Furthermore, Ryan’s  own 
statements to DOI  about some of the incident s were in certain relevant parts 
consistent with the Complainants’ allegations, and DOI found that the Complainants 
lacked a motive to fabricate allegations against Ryan.  
 
While Ryan acknowledged some of the alleged conduct – in whole or in part – he 
either claimed that he did not intend to harass the Complainant (in the case of 
Complainant 1) or that the Complainant had a motive to lie about being offended by 
his comments (in the case of Complainant 2) . Ryan otherwise denied or claimed  he 
did not recall other instances of alleged conduct that are plainly indefensible, such as 
puckering his lips towards Complainant 1, or attempting to touch her face. DOI did 
not credit Ryan’s denials that he did not engage in or did not recall such conduct, and 
DOI did not find any basis to believe that Complainant 2 was lying about taking 
offense to Ryan’s comments and behavior .  Ryan’s claim that he did not intend to 
harass the Complainants is suspect, given that it is a self-serving statement made in 
a context where he did have a motive to lie.  Regardless of Ryan’s intent, the conduct 
that DOI found him to have engaged in, consistent with the Complainants’ 
allegations, and his pattern of similar behavior as described by other witnesses, 
suggests he was at minimum reckless or careless as to how his comments and conduct 
could reasonably be received by others. In addition, as explained below, whether Ryan 
“intended” to harass is irrelevant to whether he violated law or policy. 
 
Based on these considerations, DOI substantiated the allegations and concluded that 
Ryan’s conduct created a hostile work environment for Complainants 1 and 2.  The 
substantiated conduct violated the BOE’s EEO Policy. DOI also found that Michael 
Corbett, the BOE’s  Administrative Manager and member of  the Executive 
Management team  who oversees personnel matters , engaged in conduct  on one 
occasion that violated BOE’s EEO Policy . Specifically,  in connection with a 
conversation in Corbett’s office involving Ryan, and in the presence of Complainant 
1, Corbett discussed with Ryan the topic of appropriate age differences for dating and 
suggested that the standard is “half your age plus seven .” Complainant 1, whose 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 4  
 
position at BOE was subordinate to both Corbett and Ryan, is nearly half of Ryan’s 
age plus seven .  DOI also determined that Ryan and Corbett’s conduct more likely 
than not violated applicable State and City human rights laws.  To the extent Ryan 
credibly asserted that he did not intend to harass the Complainant, neither the BOE’s 
EEO Policy, the Citywide EEO Policy, nor applicable law, requires that a harasser 
intend for his or her conduct to create a hostile work environment.  In fact, harassing 
conduct based on a protected characteristic, including race, ethnicity, and gender,  
that has the purpose or effect of creating a hostile work environment is prohibited. 
DOI found Ryan’s and Corbett’s behavior particularly inappropriate in light of their 
executive leadership positions at the BOE.  
 
B. Deficiencies in BOE’s Policies and Procedures for Addressing EEO Matters 
DOI’s investigation into Ryan’s conduct  revealed several significant gaps  in BOE’s 
policies that prevented proper handling of complaints against the Executive Director 
or other senior staff members.  
First, unlike the City’s  Mayoral agencies which are  subject to the Citywide EEO 
Policy and required by that policy to have a qualified and independent EEO Officer 
who reports directly to the agency head, DOI found that the BOE does not have  a 
dedicated, qualified senior staff member responsible for EEO matters, leading to 
confusion among BOE personnel about the existence and identity of an EEO Officer.  
Some staff that DOI interviewed believed that the Director of Personnel, Steven 
Guglielmi, was the EEO Officer . DOI found that Guglielmi is not in fact the EEO 
Officer and does not have the qu alifications, experience, or staffing to handle both 
EEO and human resources functions effectively.  Furthermore, the BOE’s EEO Policy 
specifically references an “EEO Office,” but based on DOI’s findings, BOE has no such 
office. Even if Guglielmi was in fact the EEO Officer, he does not report directly to 
the Executive Director or the Board , instead he reports to Corbett. This structure is 
inconsistent with EEO best practices, because when the EEO Officer reports to 
another senior executive, that  can limit the EEO Officer’s ability to exercise 
independent judgment in his or her investigations. The Citywide EEO Policy requires 
that the EEO Officer report directly to the agency head precisely for this reason – 
again, so that  the EEO Officer can investigate all staff, including senior staff, and 
their direct reports, without the conflict of interest that could arise if the EEO Officer 
was required to investigate either the EEO Officer’s own supervisor or someone with 
a close professional relationship with their supervisor. Without an independent, 
qualified EEO Officer, BOE’s approach to handling EEO complaints is insufficient to 
ensure fair and confidential investigations, especially when senior staff are involved  
in the allegations or the subjects of the allegations. 
Second, BOE’s EEO Policy does not provide guidance  specific to the handling of 
allegations against senior staff members, such as the Executive Director. BOE’s EEO 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 5  
 
Policy instructs staff to report allegations  to their manager or supervisor, the “EEO 
Office”, or the Director of Personnel , who reports  directly to the Administrative 
Manager (Corbett) and more broadly  to Executive Management.  If a manager or 
supervisor becomes aware of harassment, they are instructed to consult with the 
Director of Personnel , and if not available, the Executive Director or Deputy 
Executive Director. There is no separate reporting path offered to Staff to facilitate 
the reporting of allega tions against Executive Management and to prevent conflicts 
of interest with respect to investigations of allegations against Executive 
Management.  That is, there is no alternative reporting structure that would avoid 
requiring Staff to report allegations of harassment by Executive Management to 
Executive Management, as well as to avoid requiring Executive Management to 
investigate allegations against themselves. By contrast, the City wide EEO Policy 
provides that the EEO Officer should report directly to the agency head, and not to 
other members of Executive Management, and that  alleged EEO violations that 
involve the actions of the EEO Office or the agency head must be reported to  the 
Department of Citywide Administrative Services (“DCAS”) for investigation – so that 
they can be investigated independently of the subject(s) of the complaint. Again, even 
if the Director of Personnel was the BOE’s EEO Officer, as some witnesses incorrectly 
believed, the fact that he does not report directly to the Executive Director or to the 
Board is a structural issue that could make reporting allegations against other 
members of Executive Management difficult.   And the absence of a process for 
reporting allegations about Executive Management and the Executive Director 
himself also could limit Staffs’ willingness and ability to make such allegations where 
warranted.    
DOI also found issues  regarding the BOE’s handling of EEO complaints and other 
deficiencies in its internal EEO program. First, the BOE does not have a dedicated 
EEO Office that independently evaluates complaints and conducts investigations; 
instead, when the BOE’s Director of Personnel receives an EEO complaint, he refers 
the matter first to Executive Management, who then enlist investigative assistance 
from other BOE staff, such as Legal Department attorneys and borough office 
managers when a complaint concerns a borough office. The BOE’s failure to maintain 
and staff a dedicated EEO office, and to handle such complaints within that office, 
rather than disseminating such complaints for handling to other non -EEO staff,  
compromises the BOE’s ability to maintain confidentiality of complaints and 
investigations, and thus could undermine Staff confidence in the complaint and 
investigative process.2 This deficiency, particularly in the absence of a separate 
 
2 Breaches of confidentiality arose even during the pendency of this investigation . As noted above, at 
the conclusion of its investigation, DOI issued a confidential report of its findings to the Board for 
appropriate action.  DOI specifically requested that the Board keep the report confidential  and limit 
disclosure to the ten commissioners, its counsels, and individuals specifically named in the report, and 
to instruct any recipients of the report to likewise keep it confidential. Despite the Board’s agreement 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 6  
 
reporting structure for senior staff,  could create a chilling effect on reports of 
misconduct against the Executive Director  and other senior staff  and indeed may 
render the BOE unaware of, and thus unable to, address EEO allegations against its 
senior staff. This again demonstrates the importance of an independent EEO Officer 
and a reporting structure where the EEO Officer reports directly to the agency head, 
so as to empower the EEO Officer to effectively and confidentially handle complaints 
and investigations involving all staff, including other senior managers. Additionally, 
BOE did n ot maintain a n effective tracking system for EEO complaints, making it 
difficult to identify patterns or address recurring issues.  
Furthermore, u nlike Mayoral City agencies, the BOE , as an independent agency 
authorized under State law, is not by default subject to the Charter authority of  
DCAS and the City’s Equal Employment Practices Commission (EEPC), two City 
entities that provide essential equal employment practices guidance and oversight to 
other City agencies.3 Most notably, the BOE is not subject to the Citywide EEO Policy 
and therefore BOE  is not mandated by the City to apply that Policy. Many of the 
issues DOI identified above are contemplated in and addressed by the Citywide EEO 
Policy. For instance, the Citywide EEO Policy, as noted above, requires agency heads 
to appoint a qualified EEO Officer who reports directly to the agency head. The City’s 
EEO protocol also requires that EEO allegations against the agency head or the EEO 
Office be referred to DCAS for an independent investigation. Instead of fully adopting 
and complying with the Citywide EEO Policy, the BOE requires compliance only with 
certain limited portions of it, such as Citywide mandatory EEO training 
requirements.4 DCAS also provides best practices training on a regular basis to EEO 
professionals at City agencies to ensure proper implementation of EEO programs at 
each agency. In addition, City agencies regularly report information on EEO 
activities to DCAS, which include data on complaints, investigations, reasonable 
accommodations, and training. The BOE’s current EEO program does not require  
compliance with any of these best practices, which the Citywide EEO policy imposes 
on Mayoral agencies . Similarly, because the BOE is  not subject to the EEPC’s 
jurisdiction, the BOE’s EEO practices and protocols have not been subjected to  
independent external monitoring or audit by the EEPC, a City entity  authorized 
under the City Charter to perform routine audits of  City agencies and entities  with 
respect to EEO matters and that report on its findings publicly. The lack of external 
 
to honor these requests,  which were made to ensure the protection and privacy of the complainants, 
the witnesses, and Ryan, it was reported to DOI  that the confidential report was shared widely with 
others at BOE, including at its borough office(s) .  Indeed, a copy  was ultimately obtained by 
Complainant 1, who is no longer employed at the BOE or the City , through these channels . These 
breaches of confidentiality have the potential to interfere with the integrity of DOI’s investigation, and 
further supports DOI’s finding that the BOE’s practices with respect to handling  of sensitive and 
confidential EEO information as a general matter are deficient. 
3 See Corporation Counsel Opinion No. 11-90 (December 1990). 
4 Sexual harassment prevention training is required under both State and Local law.  
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 7  
 
employment practices monitoring likely contributed to a deficient EEO program at 
the BOE.  
As a City entity that employs over 900 staff – and numerous other part -time and 
temporary election workers – to perform the important work of administering 
elections throughout the City, the BOE, like other City employers, has an obligation 
to maintain a safe and respectful work environment  free from discrimination and 
harassment for all staff . The deficiencies that DOI identified in this investigation 
hinder the BOE’s ability to effectively fulfill this important obligation. In addition, in 
light of the extensive legal protections afforded under Federal, State, and City human 
rights laws, the BOE’s failure to have an effective EEO program poses legal risks to 
the BOE and to the City.  
We note that DOI previously investigated and substantiated allegations of 
misconduct against the BOE’s former General Counsel Steven Richman. In that case, 
Richman misused his position by convincing an intern he supervised that he could 
help the intern obtain a job as a security guard at political events, if the intern could 
pass a so-called “physical fitness assessment” to be administered by General Counsel 
Richman.5 This physical fitness assessment included measuring the intern’s body 
parts, placing the intern in wrestling holds , and having the intern place him in 
wrestling holds . Richman later performed a similar “assessment” on a second 
individual and took photos of the individual during the assessment .  Richman’s 
entirely inappropriate and harassing  conduct, which resulted in a criminal 
conviction, is of course distinct from Ryan’s.  Nonetheless, it is worth noting that this 
is the second set of substantiated allegations of which we are aware that involve 
misconduct by a senior member of BOE leadership and that implicate the BOE’s EEO 
Policy and pose potential liability risks under applicable human rights laws.   One 
instance of substantiated misconduct  would be too many ; two such instances make 
clear the need for significant reforms to the BOE’s EEO program. 
 
5 In 2022, following a DOI investigation,  Richman pled guilty to two counts of Official Misconduct in 
connection with unauthorized conduct with two individuals, including an intern at BOE. See Press 
Release, DOI, Former General Counsel of NYC Board of Elections Pleads Guilty to Two Counts of 
Official Misconduct in Connection with Unauthorized Conduct with an Intern at the BOE and Another 
Individual, June 2, 2022, https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/press-
releases/2022/June/14Richman_6022022.pdf. During the criminal investigation which led to this 
conviction, BOE placed Richman on paid leave. DOI found that, inconsistent with BOE’s practices and 
policies, BOE granted and permitted Richman to use 23 day s of annual leave that he had not yet 
earned and approximately 60 days of undocumented sick leave so that Richman’s leave could be “paid,” 
further indicating a need for BOE to reconsider its response to conduct that presents EEO issues.  See 
DOI, NYC Board of Elections’ Misuse of Annual and Sick Leave Related to Its Former General Counsel, 
July 2024, https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2024/30BOE.Richman.Release.Rpt.07.02.2024.pdf .   
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 8  
 
III. Recommendations 
As noted above, DOI referred its findings with respect to Ryan and Corbett to the 
Board in a detailed and confidential report . While it is the Board’s responsibility to 
determine appropriate corrective or disciplinary action, DOI took the unusual step of 
informing the Board of DOI’s view that Ryan’s conduct was sufficiently egregious, 
particularly in light of his leadership position, that termination or resignation in lieu 
of termination was warranted. The Board declined to terminate Ryan or to give him 
the opportunity to resign; instead, the Board suspended Ryan for three weeks without 
pay, directed him to attend DCAS sensitivity training,6 and placed him on probation 
for one year. The Board also suspended Corbett for one week without pay and directed 
him to attend DCAS sensitivity training. The Board’s response is appended below. 
 
DOI’s findings were not limited to Ryan and Corbett’s conduct.  DOI also found  
significant deficiencies in BOE’s policies, procedures, and protocols for addressing 
complaints of harassment, sexual harassment, and hostile work environment and 
other EEO issues. As a result, DOI recommended that BOE implement several policy 
and procedure recommendations . To date, the Board has not committed to 
implementation of those recommendations, but has stated that it will “review and 
update its EEOC policies and procedur es in part based on DOI’s recommendation.” 
DOI’s recommendations are as follows:  
 
1. BOE should formally appoint a qualified EEO Officer who reports directly 
to both the Executive Director and the President of the Board of 
Commissioners, and properly staff the EEO Office with qualified 
professionals to perform all EEO responsibilities, including investigations. 
 
2. BOE should communicate the identity and contact information of the EEO 
Officer and other EEO professionals, via email, posting on any internal 
intranet site, or other effective methods, to all BOE staff annually and at 
other appropriate intervals, such as when a new EEO Officer is appointed. 
 
3. BOE should formally adopt the Citywide EEO Policy as BOE’s EEO Policy 
and, like the City’s mayoral agencies, follow DCAS’s guidance on proper 
implementation of the EEO Policy. BOE’s EEO Policy should include, at 
minimum: 
 
• A requirement that all supervisors and managers who receive an 
allegation or otherwise become aware of misconduct that violates the 
 
6 We note that Ryan most recently completed DCAS’s EEO and Sexual Harassment Prevention training  courses on 
May 6, 2024, during the time period when the substantiated conduct occurred.  
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 9  
 
BOE’s EEO Policy refer such allegation to the EEO Officer for a 
confidential and independent investigation. 
 
• A requirement that, in the event such an allegation is against the 
Executive Director, the EEO Officer, or a BOE Commissioner, the EEO 
Officer or other supervisor or manager must refer the allegation to 
another City entity, such as DCAS or DOI, for indepen dent 
investigation.  
 
• A detailed procedure for investigation of EEO complaints which 
includes, among other things, confidentiality protocols to ensure the 
protection of complainants and witnesses, and a prohibition against 
retaliation for making a complaint or participating in an investigation. 
 
• A detailed procedure for other EEO functions, including submission and 
handling of reasonable accommodation requests and recordkeeping with 
respect to complaints, investigations, reasonable accommodations, and 
training. 
 
4. BOE should train all BOE personnel, including Executive Management and 
BOE Commissioners, at regular intervals on the EEO Policy and sexual 
harassment prevention. 
 
5. BOE should perform regular reporting to an external City entity, such as 
DCAS, with respect to EEO activities, including complaints, investigations, 
reasonable accommodations, and training. 
 
6. BOE should formally subject itself to audits and oversight by the New York 
City Equal Employment Practices Commission. 
