1 

Restoring Public Trust and Cleaning 
City Hall: What Should the Next 
Mayor Do? 
Cronyism and Conflicts of Interest in Appointments 
Our solutions Recruit and maintain professional, best-in-the-field senior officials 
Require “revolving door-in” safeguards for incoming officials 
Disclose conflicts of interest guidance for high-ranking officials 
Commit to never use City legal resources for personal legal matters 
 
Supercharged and Under-Regulated Lobbying 
Our solutions 
Disclose meetings between high-ranking officials and lobbyists 
Apply a cooling-off period for campaign consultants-turned-lobbyists 
Limit bundling by lobbyists and those doing business with the City 
Strengthen lobbying oversight by moving enforcement to COIB 
 
Underfunded and Weakened Watchdog Agencies 
Our solutions 
Fully fund COIB, DOI, CCRB 
Commit to providing materials for police and jail watchdogs 
Ensure independence and capacity of Campaign Finance Board 
Establish a procurement ethics task force 
 
Gutting Transparency Standards at City Hall 
Our solutions 
Improve FOIL reporting and responses across City government 
Restore press access to information and space 
 
Power Struggles at the Expense of the Public 
Our solutions 
Commit not to block ballot questions and support Charter reform 
Support establishing a mayoral removal mechanism over misconduct 
Clean up rules concerning electioneering on the public dime 

October 2025 

2 

How to Restore Public Trust and Clean City Hall: 
Proposals for the Next Administration 
When the next mayor steps into Gracie Mansion on January 1st, 2026, he will face a city government in 
urgent need of reform. The outgoing mayoral administration leaves behind a legacy tarnished by 
corruption scandals, weakened accountability, and eroded public trust. Restoring integrity to City Hall will 
require more than a change in leadership - it demands a renewed commitment to honest governance and 
ethical standards. 
Citizens Union has long been a driving force behind efforts to improve government and strengthen 
democracy in New York City. For over a century, we have championed major reforms in ethics and anti-
corruption laws, campaign finance, transparency, and civic engagement. In recent years, City Hall’s 
failure to uphold public integrity opened the door to misconduct and deepened New Yorkers’ cynicism. 
The next mayor must reverse this trend and establish a culture of accountability in city government. This 
report is a roadmap designed to help achieve that goal: concrete steps to rebuild trust, strengthen 
oversight, and ensure that public officials are held to the highest standards of conduct. 
 
Problem: Cronyism and Conflicts of Interest in Appointments 
The next administration must make high-ranking appointments based on merit, not favoritism. This is 
necessary to reverse a troubling trend seen in the outgoing administration, from the attempted 
appointment of the mayor’s brother as Deputy Police Commissioner to a series of top advisors and 
officials who were implicated in corruption investigations. 
Solutions 
• Recruit and maintain professional, best-in-the-field senior officials 
New York City government should attract the best and the brightest, but a staffing crisis and 
unprofessional personnel decisions have led many leaders to avoid public service. Appointments of 
top City Hall officials and senior policymakers set the tone across agencies, signaling the skills and 
character valued in government. Recruitment, hiring, and retention based on merit, experience, and 
the public interest will lead to a stronger, more effective city government. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Turn the page on cronyism by appointing top officials based on their 
experience and commitment to public service. 
• Require “revolving door-in” safeguards for incoming officials 
Incoming public servants must sever ties and divest from companies that do business with the City, 
but they are not required to recuse themselves from matters involving former business partners, 
clients, or employers. This loophole was exploited under the current administration, most prominently 

3 
 
by Frank Carone, Mayor Adams’ first Chief of Staff. U.S. Presidents required federal appointees to 
pledge a two-year recusal period for dealing with contracts and regulations related to former 
employers or clients, and New York State’s ethics commission applies a “reverse two-year bar” on 
conflicts of interest. Citizens Union has drafted legislation to close this “revolving door-in” loophole, 
and a bill has been introduced by Council Member Lincoln Restler. This policy has broad support. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Establish a cooling-off policy for high-ranking incoming officials to 
prohibit them from working on matters involving former clients or 
interests. 
• Disclose conflicts of interest guidance for high-ranking officials 
Mayor Adams reversed a de Blasio-era policy encouraging the disclosure of certain ethics guidance 
provided by the Conflicts of Interest Board (COIB) to commissioners. Because COIB’s advice is 
confidential, senior officials scrutinized by the media for questionable conduct can—and have—
claimed COIB approval or mischaracterized the guidance they received. Some have falsely claimed 
they are prohibited from disclosing ethics advice to avoid scrutiny. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Require commissioners and high-ranking City Hall officials to disclose 
COIB guidance (with privacy protections) if they cite it in response to 
public questioning about apparent conflict of interests. 
• Commit to never use City legal resources for personal legal matters 
Though it is illegal to use City resources for non-City matters, some high-ranking officials have tried 
to do so. For example, the mayor’s counsel represented him at an OATH hearing concerning rat 
violations at his private property, and the Corporation Counsel reportedly resigned, in part, over her 
refusal to represent him in personal lawsuits. Legal representation for public officials can be nuanced, 
but some cases clearly fall outside the scope of public service. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Publicly commit to not use the Law Department for legal proceedings 
unrelated to their public duties. 
 
Problem: Supercharged and Under-Regulated Lobbying 
Lobbyists, major donors, and those with business interests before the City receive disproportionate 
access and influence. The next administration has a chance to govern with a clean slate, unbound by 
traditional power players and big-money interests. 
Solutions 
• Disclose meetings between high-ranking officials and lobbyists 
The Adams administration reversed a de Blasio-era policy requiring commissioners to disclose 
meetings with registered lobbyists. Although that policy was poorly implemented, its early reversal 

4 
 
signaled that government influence could remain hidden from public view. A different message must 
be sent. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Restore and strengthen a City Hall policy requiring disclosure of 
meetings between high-ranking officials and lobbyists. 
• Apply a cooling-off period for campaign consultants-turned-lobbyists 
Citizens Union has long raised the alarm about firms offering both campaign and lobbying services. 
Lobbyists can work on a campaign and then immediately lobby the elected official on behalf of 
clients, turning political relationships into financial gain. Millions are spent on such dual-purpose firms. 
Council Member Gale Brewer has introduced legislation to address this conflict. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Prohibit City Hall officials from meeting with lobbyists who worked on 
the mayor’s campaign during the administration’s first two years. 
• Limit donation bundling by lobbyists and those doing business with the City 
Registered lobbyists and people with City business can bypass contribution limits by “bundling” 
donations from others, a loophole that gives those insiders greater access to officeholders. Problems 
with intermediaries were evident during the 2021 and 2025 campaigns. Legislation to curb lobbyist 
bundling has been introduced in the City Council. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Support legislation limiting how much registered lobbyists and 
individuals doing business with the City can bundle in donations. 
• Strengthen lobbying oversight by moving enforcement to COIB 
Currently, lobbying oversight resides in the City Clerk’s Lobbying Bureau, a small unit that performs 
minimal compliance work and reports to the City Council—the very body being lobbied. COIB’s 
expertise in ethics oversight makes it a better fit to be a lobbying watchdog. Good government 
groups widely support this move, which must be accompanied with sufficient budget to sustain this 
new responsibility. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Support transferring lobbying oversight and enforcement from the City 
Clerk to the Conflicts of Interest Board. 

5 
 
Problem: Underfunded and Weakened Watchdog Agencies 
New York City’s independent oversight agencies have been crucial in exposing many of the ethical 
misconduct cases in recent years and holding powerful officials accountable. But their ability to do so has 
been hindered by budget constraints, limited access to information, and legal loopholes. This is a critical 
moment to strengthen the ethical watchdogs that serve as a bulwark against abuse of power. 
Solutions 
• Proper funding for the Conflicts of Interest Board, the Department of 
Investigation, and the Civilian Complaint Review Board 
Under the auspices of cost saving initiatives, these agencies have had budgets frozen or cut, limiting 
their core functions. Since 2019, DOI has lost more than a quarter of its employees, and COIB’s 
staff has been reduced by 16%, weakening the anti-corruption agencies. The CCRB suspended 
certain investigations and closed 1,440 complaints without full review. While long-term solutions 
include protected budgets for oversight bodies, an immediate first step is restoring adequate funding. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Commit to fully funding the Conflicts of Interest Board, Department of 
Investigation, and Civilian Complaint Review Board. 
• Commit to providing materials for police and jail watchdogs 
The CCRB has struggled to obtain timely access to records and materials from the NYPD, impeding 
its investigations. The current administration has further limited transparency by blocking the Board of 
Correction (BOC) from accessing critical footage related to jail conditions. These roadblocks 
undermine public trust and prevent accountability for misconduct. A more transparent and cooperative 
approach is needed. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Commit to full cooperation with police and jail oversight bodies, 
including the timely release of materials needed for investigations. 
• Ensure the continued independence and capacity of the NYC Campaign 
Finance Board 
New York City’s public campaign financing system, widely regarded as a national model, has allowed 
grassroots candidates to compete with those backed by big-money donors. It prioritizes small-dollar 
contributions, encourages public participation, and reduces the influence of super PACs and special 
interests. However, the system has faced sustained political attacks, including from Mayor Adams, 
who has sought to undermine its authority. Any interference threatens to weaken one of the city's 
most effective tools for clean elections. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Publicly commit to maintaining the full independence, staffing, and 
authority of the Campaign Finance Board and defend it from political 
interference. 

6 
 
• Establish a procurement ethics task force 
The City’s procurement system—especially under emergency orders—has emerged as a weak point 
in its anti-corruption infrastructure. Recent scandals have demonstrated how emergency contracts 
and opaque processes can be exploited for personal gain or awarded without proper vetting. While 
reducing red tape is important, it should not come at the cost of oversight and integrity. Procurement 
reform is complex and requires thoughtful, expert input. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Establish a procurement ethics and efficiency task force in partnership 
with the Comptroller, procurement officials, and ethics experts, which 
would evaluate contracting practices, assess vulnerabilities, and 
recommend reforms. 
 
Problem: Gutting Transparency Standards at City Hall 
The outgoing administration has dramatically reversed prior standards of transparency when it comes to 
access to public information and government proceedings, eroding a core principle of democratic 
accountability. A more open government is sorely needed. 
Solutions 
• Improve FOIL reporting and responses across City government 
Public access to records through Freedom of Information Law (FOIL) requests is frequently delayed, 
with some agencies taking over 400 days on average to respond. These delays discourage public 
inquiry and reduce transparency. All agencies should be required to use the City’s OpenRecords 
portal, and the City must prioritize improving tracking and response times. Citizens Union, and nearly 
two-thirds of council members, support legislation to improve FOIL responsiveness. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Commit to reducing FOIL response times and require all City agencies 
to adopt the OpenRecords portal, ensuring greater transparency and 
reporting. 
• Restore press access to information and space 
The Adams administration has taken steps to restrict access to the press, including reducing 
briefings, encrypting police radio channels, barring reporters from press conferences, and attempting 
to relocate reporters from City Hall and 1 Police Plaza. These actions limit journalists' ability to report 
on government activities and erode public trust. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Rebuild a productive and open relationship with the New York City 
press corps, and commit to regular press briefings and meaningful 
access for reporters. 

7 
 
Problem: Power Struggles at the Expense of the Public 
Recent years have been marked by a tense relationship between the legislative and executive branches, 
with frequent clashes over policy, appointments, and jurisdiction. While disagreements between mayors 
and city councils are expected, the gamesmanship has undermined the public interest. The next mayor 
and City Council can prioritize cooperation and long-term reforms that foster collaboration rather than 
political self-interest. 
Solutions 
• Commit not to block ballot questions and support Charter reform 
All recent mayors, including the current one, misused their control over the Charter Revision 
Commission to remove ballot questions proposed by the City Council or citizens. This undemocratic 
maneuver undermines public engagement and encourages cross-branch rivalry. The process of 
amending the City Charter through a referendum should be open, deliberative, provide sufficient time 
for meaningful public input, and be safeguarded to prevent rushed or politically motivated revisions. 
The legislature recently passed a bill removing the mayor’s power to bump ballot questions. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Pledge not to use mayoral authority to block ballot questions proposed 
by the Council or voters, and support reforms that protect the integrity 
of the Charter revision process. 
• Support establishing a mayoral removal mechanism over misconduct 
New York City lacks a practical, balanced, and clearly defined mechanism to remove a mayor under 
exceptional circumstances related to misconduct, as has been evident in the past year. Citizens 
Union developed a hybrid and fair removal process that ensures accountability and maintains 
democratic safeguards, involving clear criteria, due process, action by the Council, and a referendum. 
This proposal is being considered by the Council’s Commission to Strengthen Local Democracy. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Publicly support the establishment of a formal process to remove a 
mayor in cases of serious misconduct. 
• Clean up rules concerning electioneering on the public dime 
The prohibition on elected officials and public servants using government resources for electioneering 
has been steadily eroding in recent years—particularly when the legislative and executive branches 
find themselves on opposing sides of a public referendum. This erosion is largely due to legal 
loopholes in the enforcement and oversight of City Charter rules. The Charter should be amended to 
explicitly authorize COIB to enforce key ethical guidelines that safeguard taxpayer funds from being 
misused for political purposes. 
WHAT THE NEXT MAYOR CAN DO: 
Support legislation that empowers COIB to enforce legal restrictions on 
government-funded electioneering.