more 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
JOCELYN E. STRAUBER 
COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE Release #41-2025 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 15, 2025 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
  
DOI’S OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR THE NYPD (“OIG-NYPD”) REVIEWS NYPD’S RESPONSE TO 
OIG-NYPD’S 2023 RECOMMENDATIONS CONCERNING THE CRIMINAL GROUP DATABASE  
 
The Department of Investigation’s (“DOI”) Office of the Inspector General for the New York City 
Police Department (“OIG -NYPD”) released a Report today assessing the  status of  OIG-NYPD’s 
recommendations to the New York City Police Department (“NYPD”) concerning NYPD’s Criminal Group 
Database. Seventeen recommendations were made in OIG-NYPD’s 2023 Report “An Investigation Into the 
Criminal Group Database.” Of  these 17 recommendations, 11 were accepted, five were rejected, and one 
was placed under consideration. Today’s Report focuses on eight of the 11 accepted recommendations, 
finding four have been fully implemented and four partially implemented. (Of the remaining three, two have 
been fully implemented and one is not yet implemented. ) Today’s Report, based on OIG-NYPD’s review, 
issues 13 new recommendations to NYPD to ensure the Department’s compliance with current policies and 
to further enhance transparency in its use of the Criminal Group Database (“CGD”). A copy of OIG-NYPD’s 
Report is attached to this release and can be found at this link:  
https://www.nyc.gov/site/doi/oignypd/web/report.page  
DOI Commissioner Jocelyn E. Strauber said, “This Report assesses the implementation status of 
eight recommendations accepted by NYPD in 2023, and shows that NYPD has made substantial 
improvements to its handling of the database. Today we make  13 additional recommendations to build on 
those improvements and to ensure continued compliance with NYPD policies . DOI’s OIG-NYPD will 
continue to pursue full implementation of our 2023 recommendations and the recommendations in this 
Report in the coming months.”  
OIG-NYPD Inspector General Jeanene L. Barrett said, “Our updated review of the Criminal Group 
Database shows that NYPD has fully implemented four  of the eight recommendations that we reviewed in 
this Report, and partially implemented the remaining f our. While NYPD’s progress is encouraging, more 
needs to be done to ensure that the database functions as it is intended, including timely review of each 
individual in the database to determine whether continued inclusion is warranted. ” 
As of December 2022, there were 16,141 individuals included in the CGD, 98% of whom were 
male, identified as Black or Hispanic and below 42 years in age. As of June 2024, the number of individuals 
in the database had decreased by slightly over  13% to 13,989, and as of October 2025, the numbers had 
declined by 39%, to 8,563. The demographics of the individuals in the database has remained largely 
consistent; predominately Black and Hispanic men between the ages of 18 and 34. 
This Report focuses on eight accepted recommendations made in the March 2023 Report. NYPD 
accepted Recommendation 2, which called on NYPD to revise its Impact and Use Policy for the CGD, to 
more clearly describe the CGD’s activation, renewal, and deactivation processes; explain the nature and 
extent of the evidence required to satisfy the entry criteria; and identify by name the law enforcement and 

2 
 
other external entities with whom NYPD m ay share information about the individuals included in the CGD, 
among other requirements. Seven additional accepted recommendations proposed specific CGD-related 
policy changes for inclusion in NYPD’s written policies. NYPD updated its policies in October 2023 and 
today’s Report concludes that these updated policies follow the 2023 Report recommendations accepted 
by the Department . However, there are still areas where the Department’s policies can be clarified and 
improved.   
Below are the eight accepted policy and procedure recommendations issued in OIG-NYPD’s 2023 
Report that were assessed in this Report: 
Accepted Recommendations 
Rec. 2 Within 180 days, NYPD should revise the Impact and Use Policy (“IUP”) for the CGD 
to describe the activation, renewal, and deactivation processes, explain the nature 
and extent of the evidence required to satisfy the entry criteria, and identify by name 
the law enforcement and other external entities with whom NYPD may share 
information about the individuals included in the CGD, for investigative or other 
purposes. The document should also describe the security protections that prevent 
unauthorized parties, within or outside of NYPD, from accessing the CGD.  
Rec. 3 NYPD should require a multilevel review process (memorialized in writing) for the 
activation, renewal, and deactivation of all entries in the CGD, supported by the 
signature of each reviewer where required. 
Rec. 4 NYPD should provide written guidance to officers explaining how to apply the Option 
A and B entry criteria, including examples of the type and extent of evidence that is 
sufficient for activation. 
Rec. 5 NYPD should provide written guidance for officers about how to complete the Person 
Maintenance, Activation, and Renewal DD5s for the maintenance and entry of 
individuals into the CGD and should include a requirement that available 
documentation be attached to the DD5s to substantiate that entry criteria are 
satisfied. 
Rec. 6 NYPD should create a list of police encounters and arrest types that constitute 
“qualifying police contact,” for purposes of renewal determinations, to be used by 
officers responsible for deciding whether to renew or deactivate individuals from the 
CGD.   
Rec. 11 NYPD should notify parents or guardians of minors that their children have been 
included in the CGD, within 60 days of inclusion, unless notification would interfere 
with active criminal investigations. 
Rec. 13 NYPD should ensure that officers completing Person Maintenance, Activation and 
Renewal forms do not have access to sealed arrest information for that purpose, 
including, but not limited to ensuring that these DD5 forms do not autofill with sealed 
arrest information, unless explicitly authorized by law. 
Rec. 14 NYPD should not consider sealed arrests when making CGD activation and renewal 
determinations. 
 
For this review, OIG-NYPD analyzed database entries and the associated DD5s for a sample of 
531 individuals in the database, to evaluate NYPD’s implementation of the 2023 recommendations . In 
particular, the DD5s were used to assess the Department’s implementation of six Recommendations (3-
5, 11, 13 and 14) , based on NYPD’s updated and new policies issued pursuant to Recommendations 2 
and 6. Based on the documents provided by NYPD, OIG-NYPD makes the following findings: 
1. NYPD updated its CGD IUP within 88 days of accepting Recommendation 2. The updated IUP 
described the activation process, and the changed criteria for renewal and deactivation of 
individuals. However, the IUP did not identify by name the law enforcement or external entities 
with whom the Department may share information. As a result, Recommendation 2 is 
considered partially implemented.   
 
2. Consistent with the findings from the 2023 Report, the renewal and deactivations are not 
reviewed by a supervisor or otherwise subject to a multilevel review process, contrary to the 
2023 recommendation which NYPD had accepted. NYPD policy requires a multilevel review 
3 
 
process for activations but there is no process written into policy for renewals and deactivations, 
as a result, Recommendation 3 is partially implemented.  
 
3. NYPD has issued an internal memorandum describing in detail the activation, renewal, and 
deactivation processes, discussed the types of evidence necessary to support activation into the 
CGD, memorialized in writing the multilevel authorization process for activation, provided some 
guidance related to completing the Person Maintenance and Activation DD5s, explained the 
youth notification process for those under 18 activated into the CGD, and provided updated entry 
criteria. Despite this guidance, some reporting officers completed the Activation DD5s incorrectly. 
For example, on DD5s where two independent sources were required, there wer e reporting 
officers who listed themselves as one of the two sources. In another instance, the reporting officer 
listed themselves as an independent source when the selected entry criteria did not require that 
a source be named to support the activation. These findings were limited to a select few reporting 
officers. As a result, Recommendation 4 is considered implemented.  
 
4. NYPD updated its IUP to include written guidance for the completion of Activation DD5s, which 
notes “a written narrative and supporting documentation must accompany the recommendation 
for Criminal Group Database entry.” However, the IUP fails to provide specific details about the 
required content of that narrative or supporting documentation. The Chief of Detectives 
Memorandum does provi de sufficient direction, including more detail about the type of support 
necessary for the nomination. This finding is associated with R ecommendation 4 and is 
therefore considered implemented.  
 
5. NYPD generally improved the nature and extent of the narrativ e details and other supporting 
evidence included in the Activation and Person Maintenance DD5s. The DD5s included more 
details within the narrative section. Officers included urls when required except in a few instances, 
as well as relevant screenshots for all individuals activated under Option A (1).
1 However, in the 
instance where two independent sources were identified for activation, the information derived 
from the sources to justify a nomination was general in nature, appearing to be boilerplate 
language. Some sources did not provide any context for their “reasonable belief” of an individual’s 
criminal group membership. Supportive narratives from sources generally stated that “in 
conference with the field intelligence officer, they had knowledge that the individual was a 
member of, or known to the precinct as a member of a specific gang.” Because NYPD has 
provided written guidance about the application of the entry criteria, R ecommendation 4 is 
considered implemented; however, officers should be instructed to document the specific 
information from in dependent sources that supports a determination of gang 
membership. 
 
6. While NYPD updated its CGD IUP and issued a Chief of Detectives Memorandum to address the 
circumstances that can justify renewal, it provided limited guidance related to the completion of  
renewal DD5s within the IUP. However, the Chief of Detectives Memorandum does state if an 
individual remains within the database NYPD’s Real-Time Crime Center/Social Media Analysis 
Unit (“RTCC/SMART”) must include supporting documentation for continued inclusion. Since the 
Chief of Detectives Memorandum states that supporting documentation must be included for 
continued inclusion, Recommendation 5 is considered implemented. 
  
7. Within its IUP, NYPD changed those who could recommend someone for entry from a precinct 
field intelligence officer, an investigator assigned to a Detective Bureau Gang Squad, or an 
investigator assigned to the Social Media Analysis and Research Team, to NYPD personnel from 
the Intelligence Bureau, Detective Bureau Borough Narcotics Commands, and Detective Bureau 
Gun Violence Suppression Unit and its sub- commands. According to NYPD, these individuals 
have narrow investigative functions with a focus on high- crime areas and gang- related activity, 
and therefore are the appropriate units to nominate individuals into the CGD.  
 
8. With respect to qualifying conduct that justifies renewal into the database, ( Recommendation 
6), NYPD has updated its IUP to include an arrest “for a violent crime, possession of a weapon, 
                                                           
1 Option 1 is when an individual admits their membership within the criminal group to a member of NYPD, or admits 
by using language and symbols of membership on their own social media account. 
4 
 
or any other crime committed in furtherance of the criminal group’s activities” as qualifying 
conduct that is sufficient for renewal. As a result, R ecommendation 6 is considered 
implemented.  
 
9. In the updated IUP and the Chief of Detectives Memorandum, NYPD included a new Youth 
Coordination Officer (“YCO”) parental/guardian notification process for those under the age of 
18, with notification required to take place within 60 days after activation into the database. 
Despite the updated IUP and the Chief of Detectives Memorandum, the Department failed to 
complete any notifications. The Office brought this issue to NYPD’s attention, and NYPD advised 
that a new procedure will be implemented that will require the nominating detective, not the YCO, 
to notify the juvenile’s parent or guardian. That procedural change is still pending. As a result, 
Recommendation 11 is considered partially implemented.  
 
10. NYPD updated the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to note that inclusion in the CGD 
cannot be based on a sealed arrest ; however, these updated policies do not address the issue 
of ensuring that officers do not have access to sealed arrest information. DD5s clearly indicate 
that an arrest has been sealed, and information such as the complainant or narrative about the 
incident are unavailable. However, the arrest number, arrest, and top arrest charge are still visible 
on DD5s. The Department has represented to this Office that it plans to change the activation 
and renewal DD5s so that they no longer contain this information, but this change has not yet 
been made. As a result, Recommendation 13 is considered partially implemented.    
 
11. As noted above, NYPD included in the updated IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum that 
inclusion in the CGD cannot be based on a sealed arrest. There were 10 DD5s reviewed by OIG-
NYPD that included cases where renewals were based on an arrest and all of the arrests were 
sealed at the time of OIG-NYPD’s review. The Office confirmed that four of the ten renewals were 
based on arrests that were sealed at the time of the renewal determination, but those four 
determinations were made prior to the issuance of the Chief of Detectives Memorandum that 
made clear that renewal cannot be based on a sealed arrest. The other six arrests were sealed 
after the renewal determination,  meaning that they were unsealed at the time the renewal 
determination was made, and appropriately relied on at that time.  As such, Recommendation 
14 is implemented.  
 
12. The 2023 Report found that the average delay for the review of entries was 69.1 days for  the 
entire sample, 28.9 days for adults, and 188.9 days for minors. For this review, delays were even 
longer with at least 151 entries (48 minors and 103 adults) between 6 and 60+ months past due 
at the time of their renewal or deactivation. OIG -NYPD conveyed those figures to NYPD during 
the course of this investigation and NYPD promptly undertook efforts to reduce any remaining 
delays. NYPD now represents that the maximum delay for renewal and deactivation review is 
eight days.  
 
13. The IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum makes it clear that those under 18 at the time of 
activation or renewal must be reviewed every two years from the date of that activation or renewal 
and those 18 years or older at the time of activation or renewal must be reviewed every t hree 
years from the date of that activation or renewal . The Office’s investigation found that the 
automated review system incorrectly extended the review time from two years to three years if a 
person was activated at 16 or 17 and turned 18 prior to their two-year review period. There were 
59 individuals under 18 who were reviewed as part of this update. Forty -eight individuals were 
delayed for review from 6 to 60 months. According to NYPD this was due to a vendor coding 
error that has now been corrected. Moving forward those activated at 16 or 17 will be reviewed 
at their two-year review period.  
 
Based on these findings, OIG-NYPD issued 13 new policy and procedure recommendations: 
 
1. Ensure that all uniformed personnel authorized to nominate individuals into the CGD receive 
training about the requirements of the IUP and the Chief of Detectives Memorandum.  
 
5 
 
2. Update the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to require the two independent reliable 
sources to provide substantive explanations for their reasonable belief of an individual’s criminal 
group membership and to document those explanations on activation DD5s.  
 
3. Update the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to clarify that the two independent sources 
should be different from the reporting officer.  
 
4. Update the IUP to mirror the detailed guidelines included within the Chief of Detectives 
Memorandum.  
 
5. Update the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to reflect a multilevel review process for 
renewals and ensure that a supervisor reviews and signs off on all renewal DD5s, as previously 
recommended and accepted by the Department, and list the required supporting documentation. 
 
6. Update the IUP to require the nominating detective to notify the juvenile’s parent or guardian 
within 60-days of activation into the CGD.  
 
7. Update the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to ensure that renewal and activation 
DD5s include a required field containing the individual’s next review date.  
 
8. Create, and memorialize in writing, an internal audit requirement to ensure that notifications 
to parents of minors added to the database are made, that the associated Notification DD5s 
are completed, and that the notification appears in a new column within the database as 
required by the Chief of Detectives Memorandum.  
 
9. Confirm whether any individual activated at age 16 or 17 has been in the database for over two 
years without a review, due to the coding error identified above, and review any such individual 
to determine whether they should be renewed into the database or deactivated. 
 
10. Ensure that supporting documentation is included for all renewals.  
 
11. Conduct quarterly audits to ensure that there are no past due entries for review, and if there are, 
renew or deactivate them immediately.  
 
12. Review individuals renewed based on an arrest every six months to ensure that renewals are not 
based on arrests that are subsequently sealed. NYPD should at minimum explore whether it is 
feasible to audit renewals for this purpose.  
 
13. Collect, analyze, and publish data concerning the number of entries added, renewed, and 
deactivated from the database annually 
This report was prepared by DOI’s Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD, specifically, 
Inspector General Jeanene L. Barrett with the assistance of Deputy Inspector General Lesley Bedeau, Data 
Analyst Stephen Elin, Director of Data Analytics Shyam Prasad, Special Counsel to the Inspectors General 
Maria Paolillo, and Director of Intergovernmental Affairs and Special Counsel Rebecca Chasan, and was 
supervised by Deputy Commissioner of Strategic Initiatives Christopher Ryan and Deputy 
Commissioner/Chief of Investigations Dominick Zarrella. 
 
DOI is one of the oldest law-enforcement agencies in the country and New York City’s corruption watchdog. Investigations may 
involve any agency, officer, elected official or employee of the City, as well as those who do business with or receive benefits from 
the City. DOI’s strategy attacks corruption comprehensively through systemic investigations that lead to high-impact arrests, 
preventive internal controls and operational reforms that improve the way the City runs. 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Update on NYPD’s 
Implementation of 
DOI’s 2023 Criminal  
Group Database 
Recommendations 
 
New York City Department of Investigation 
Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD  
 
October 2025                    
Jocelyn E. Strauber  
Commissioner                                                                                      
Jeanene L. Barrett 
Inspector General  
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 1 
 
 Executive Summary ........................................................................................ 2 
II.      Background ..................................................................................................... 12 
 NYPD’s 90-Day Response to DOI’s OIG-NYPD Recommendations ..... 13 
 Implementation of Recommendations ...................................................... 14 
A. Recommendations 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 13, and 14 – IUP Revision and Written 
Guidance as of October 2023 .................................................................. 14 
B. An Assessment of the CGD IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum
 ................................................................................................................. 15 
i. Recommendation 2 ..................................................................................... 15 
ii. Recommendation 3 ..................................................................................... 18 
iii. Recommendation 4 ..................................................................................... 19 
iv. Recommendation 5 ..................................................................................... 19 
v. Recommendation 6 ..................................................................................... 20 
vi. Recommendation 11 ................................................................................... 21 
vii. Recommendation 13 ................................................................................... 22 
viii. Recommendation 14 ................................................................................... 22 
 Recommendations 3, 4, 5, 11, 13, and 14 -  CGD Policy Changes & 
Implementation .............................................................................................. 23 
A. The Current Activation and Review Processes ..................................... 23 
B. Results of Review of Active CGD Entries as of June 26, 2024 ............. 24 
i. Analysis of the Activation Process ............................................................. 25 
ii. Analysis related to the Review Process ..................................................... 29 
 Conclusion ....................................................................................................... 39 
 Summary of Key Findings and Recommendations ................................ 40 
 Appendix A: List of Recommendations and NYPD’s Initial Response
 ........................................................................................................................... 46 
 Appendix B: Impact and Use Policy – October2023 ............................... 48 
 Appendix C: Impact and Use Policy – April 2021 ................................... 59 
 
  
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 2 
 
 Executive Summary∗ 
In April 2023, the Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD (“OIG-NYPD” or “the 
Office”) released its public report summarizing a multiyear assessment of the New 
York City Police Department’s ( “NYPD” or “the Department ”) Criminal Group 
Database ( “CGD” or “database”). According to NYPD, t he databas e, which the 
Department began using in 2013, is intended to support the investigative and public 
safety efforts of officers by making available to them details about alleged gang 
members and intelligence relati ng to criminal groups. The  2023 report concluded, 
among other findings, that: 
 
• NYPD did not provide sufficient guidance for officers regarding the criteria 
used to add an individual’s name to the database (referred to as “activation”)  
• NYPD’s methods to add individuals’ names to the CGD were deficient 
• The documentation purporting to support the inclusion and renewal of entries 
in the database (that is the conclusion, upon review, that an individual should 
remain in the database) was deficient 
• NYPD lacked any process for notifying parents that their minor childrens ’ 
names were added to the database   
• NYPD lacked documentation of key policies and practices related to the use of 
the database 
 
On the basis of those findings, OIG -NYPD issued 17 recommendations for 
improvement. NYPD accepted 11, rejected five , and placed one under 
consideration.  The Report focuses on the implementation status of  eight of the 11 
accepted recommendations, finding four were fully implemented and four were 
partially implemented. OIG-NYPD also notes that two of t he remaining three 
recommendations have been fully implemented, and no progress has been made on 
third recommendation. 
 
NYPD accepted a recommendation that the Department revise its  Impact and Use 
Policy (“IUP”) for the CGD “to describe the activation, renewal, and deactivation 
processes, explain the nature and extent of the evidence required to satisfy the entry 
criteria, and identify by name the law enforcement and other external entities with 
 
∗DOI Commissioner Jocelyn E. Strauber and Inspector General Jeanene L. Barrett thank DOI staff  
for their assistance in producing this Report, specifically, Lesley Bedeau, Deputy Inspector General 
(OIG-NYPD); Stephen Elin, Data Analyst; Shyam Prasad, Direct or of Data Analytics; Maria Paollilo, 
Special Counsel to the Inspectors General; and Rebecca Chasan, Director of Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Special Counsel. Appreciation is extended to the New York City Police Department for their 
assistance and cooperation during this review. 
 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 3 
 
whom NYPD may share information about the individuals included in the CGD, for 
investigative or other purposes …[and to]  describe the security protections that 
prevent unauthorized parties, within or outside of NYPD, from accessing the CGD ” 
(Recommendation 2).1 To implement this recommendation, NYPD updated the IUP 
for the CGD on October 13, 2023 and issued a Chief of Detectives Memorandum  on 
October 11, 2023.  
 
As part of its IUP update, NYPD limited the activation criteria, narrowing the basis 
on which individuals could be added to the database, and made changes to the officers 
within the Department responsible for nominating individuals for entry . The 
Department also clarified the multilevel review process for activation.
2 For those 
under the age of 18, the IUP provided details of a newly created parental notification 
process—a Youth Coordination Officer ( “YCO”) within the individual’s resident 
precinct makes the notifications. The IUP also provided guidance for proposing that 
an individual be added to the database, noting that supporting documentation must 
be included with the nomination paperwork.  
 
The Chief of Detectives Memorandum, essentially an extension of the IUP, provided 
more detailed guidelines. The memorandum included specific information related to 
the completion of the Activation and Person Maintenance DD5s ,3 documentation 
required to add or renew an individual into the database––including the inclusion of 
a social media address URL and screenshots of posting(s), and the requirements for 
each level of review  including signatures. Finally, the memo provided details of the 
youth notification process, that includes a YCO notification to the guardian, and the 
completion of a “YCO Criminal Group Member Notification” DD5 that will verify the 
notification or attempted notification(s) until the guardian is contacted.  
 
While those policy updates followed  the recommendations accepted by the 
Department, the Office’s review identified areas still in need of improvement .  
Reporting officers need more direction to complete activation DD5s, and should also 
be instructed that a multilevel review and approval process  must be followed to 
maintain an individual in the database . Furthermore, our investigation found that 
 
1 N.Y.C. DEP’T OF INVESTIGATION, OFF. OF THE INSPECTOR GEN. FOR THE NYPD, AN INVESTIGATION INTO 
NYPD’S CRIMINAL GROUP DATABASE (2023), 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2023/16CGDRpt.Release04.18.2023.pdf  
2 The multilevel review process includes review and approval of the activation DD5 by the immediate 
supervisor of the NYPD investigator from the nominating command, and then a secondary review and 
approval by the RTCC/SMART supervisor.  
3 A DD5 is a broad category of forms that document NYPD officers’ interactions with the public. An 
Activation DD5 is completed to activate an individual into the CGD, while a Person Maintenance DD5 
preserves law enforcement information related to the individual. 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 4 
 
there were database programming issues that resulted in the inaccurate 
determination of ages for adults and minors within the database, and separately, the 
review time frame was automatically extended from two years to three years for those 
individuals activated into the CGD at 16 and 17 years old. The Department confirmed 
the programming issue had been fixed and that moving forward individuals added to 
the database before age 18 will be reviewed at two years following activation.  
 
NYPD requires a review of entries within the database every two years following 
activation or renewal for those under the age of 18, and every three years for those 
18 and older. Following that review, individuals must be removed from the database 
unless (1) they were arrested for a violent crime, possession of a weapon, or any other 
crime committed in furtherance of the criminal group’s activities; (2) the person is on 
parole or probation at the time of review; or (3) is in the custody of a local, state, or 
federal correctional facility or similar facility. Individuals who meet any of the three 
criteria are renewed into the database with the completion of a Renewal DD5, which 
notes the basis of the renewal , and should include documentation supporting that 
basis. If an individual does not meet the criteria for renewal, a Deactivation DD5 is 
completed, removing the person from the database.  Independent of the programming 
issue impacting those activated into the database before age 18, the Office also found 
extensive delays related to the two- and three-year review cycles, which we reported 
to NYPD during the course of this investigation.
4 NYPD addressed those issues, and 
advised that as of October 6, 2025 the maximum delay for renewal and deactivation 
review was eight days.5  
 
 
4 OIG-NYPD informed NYPD of the delays on April 22, 2025; on May 14, 2025, NYPD advised that the 
delays had been reduced, and that the longest delay at that time was 11 days.  NYPD determined that 
some individuals were missing renewal or deactivation DD5s because the system failed to notify them 
that those individuals were due for a review as a result of a coding issue, and that certain other 
individuals were not yet due for review .  On August 19, 2025, NYPD advised the Office that the 
maximum delay was eight days. After an additional follow -up with NYPD, the Department further 
advised that it had identified another error and was  conducting a review of all coding used by the 
database vendor. On October 6, 2025, NYPD notified the Office that an additional vendor coding error 
had been found. The Department advised that that coding error had impacted the review date of 1,959 
people. According to NYPD as of September 19, 2025, 33 out of the 1,959 remained overdue and those 
individuals had been reviewed as of October 6, 2025 —23 were renewed and 10 were deactivated. The 
Department also committed to quarterly checks of the CGD for proper technical function and to provide 
confirmation to OIG-NYPD that the code continues to run consistent with Department policy following 
those checks.  
5 In September, after OIG-NYPD requested additional DD5s that NYPD had not previously provided, 
NYPD identified an additional 3,846 database entries that had not been placed in queue for renewal 
and deactivation when they were due for review. According to NYPD, it cleared this backlog —
deactivating 3,478 entries and renewing 368 entries, as of late September. 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 5 
 
Another accepted recommendation called for the Department to “annually, as 
requested…provide a random sample (including minors) of Activation  (including 
Person Maintenance), Renewal and Deactivation DD5s and supporting 
documentation to OIG -NYPD for review ”(Recommendation 17). 6  Recommendation 
17 facilitates OIG-NYPD’s annual monitoring of the Department’s implementation of 
all policy and procedural recommendations relating to the database, through a review 
of activation, renewal and deactivation DD5s provided by the Department.7 
 
For this review, OIG-NYPD analyzed entries and DD5s associated with a sample of 
531 individuals in the database for adherence to the IUP and Chief of Detectives 
Memorandum. This sample included 148 individuals who were added to the database 
between October 13, 2023 and June 26, 2024, 8 and 383 individuals in the database 
who were due to be reviewed between 2020 and 2024 for renewal or deactivation , 
whose entries should have been either renewed or deactivated. The DD5s were used 
to assess the Department’s implementation of Recommendations 3-5, 11, 13 and 14, 
based on updated and new policies issued pursuant to Recommendations 2 and 6. 9 
This report summarizes the Office’s findings with respect to NYPD’s implementation 
of those policies, and issues additional recommendations.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 For an individual to be activated into the database, two forms must be completed, a Person 
Maintenance DD5 and an Activation DD5, both of which include relevant law enforcement information 
related to the individual. 
7 N.Y.C. DEP’T OF INVESTIGATION, OFF. OF THE INSPECTOR GEN. FOR THE NYPD, AN INVESTIGATION INTO 
NYPD’S CRIMINAL GROUP DATABASE (2023), 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2023/16CGDRpt.Release04.18.2023.pdf  
8 OIG-NYPD requested Activation and Person Maintenance DD5s for 148 individuals that had been 
added to the database between October 13, 2023 and July 3, 2024. The 148 entries included all 68 
adults activated into the CGD between October 14, 2023 and April, 2024, and all 80 minors activated 
into the CGD between October 14, 2023 and July 3, 2024.  
9 See Appendix A for a full detail of all Recommendations.  
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 6 
 
Table 1: Recommendations 2-6, 11, 13 and 14 assessed within this report  
 
Accepted Recommendations 
Rec. 2 
 
Within 180 days, NYPD should revise the IUP for the CGD to describe the activation, 
renewal, and deactivation processes, explain the nature and extent of the evidence required 
to satisfy the entry criteria, and identify by name the law enforcement and other external 
entities with whom NYPD may share information about the individuals included in the CGD, 
for investigative or other purposes. The document should also describe the security 
protections that preven t unauthorized parties, within or outside of NYPD , from accessing 
the CGD. 
Rec. 3 NYPD should require a multilevel review process (memorialized in writing) for the 
activation, renewal, and deactivation of all entries in the CGD, supported by the signature 
of each reviewer where required. 
Rec. 4 NYPD should provide written guidance to officers explaining how to apply the Option A and 
B entry criteria, including examples of the type and extent of evidence that is sufficient for 
activation. 
Rec. 5 NYPD should provide written guidance for officers about how to complete the Person 
Maintenance, Activation, and Renewal DD5s for the maintenance and entry of individuals 
into the CGD, and should include a requirement that available documentation be attached 
to the DD5s to substantiate that entry criteria are satisfied.  
Rec. 6 NYPD should create a list of police encounters and arrest types that constitute “qualifying 
police contact,” for purposes of renewal determinations, to be used by officers responsible for 
deciding whether to renew or deactivate individuals from the CGD.   
Rec. 11 NYPD should notify parents or guardians of minors that their children have been included 
in the CGD, within 60 days of inclusion , unless notification would interfere with active 
criminal investigations.  
Rec. 13 NYPD should ensure that officers completing Person Maintenance, Activation and Renewal 
forms do not have access to sealed arrest information  for that purpose, including, but not 
limited to ensuring that these DD5 forms do not autofill with sealed arrest information, 
unless explicitly authorized by law.  
Rec. 14 NYPD should not consider sealed arrests when making CGD activation and renewal 
determinations. 
 
As of December 2022, there were 16,141 individuals included in the CGD, 98% of 
whom were male, identified as Black or Hispanic and below 42 years in age. 10 As of 
June 26, 2024, the number of individuals in the database ha d decreased by slightly 
over 13% to 13,989. In correspondence provided to the Office on October 6, 2025, 
NYPD reported that there were currently 8,563 individuals in the database, which is 
about a 39% decline from the 13,989 confirmed June 2024.  The demographics of the 
 
10 N.Y.C. DEP’T OF INVESTIGATION, OFF. OF THE INSPECTOR GEN. FOR THE NYPD, AN INVESTIGATION 
INTO NYPD’S CRIMINAL GROUP DATABASE (2023), 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2023/16CGDRpt.Release04.18.2023.pdf   
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 7 
 
individuals in the  database has remained largely consistent from the end of 2022 
through mid-2024; predominately Black and Hispanic men between the ages of 18 to 
34.  
 
Based on the documents provided by NYPD regarding recommendations 2 -6, 11, 13, 
and 14 from the 2023 Report, the Office makes the following findings: 
 
1. NYPD updated its CGD IUP within 88 days of accepting Recommendation 
2. The updated IUP  described the activation  process, and the changed 
criteria for renewal and deactivation of individuals. However, the IUP did 
not identify by name the law enforcement or external entities with whom 
the Department may share information. As a result, Recommendation 2 is 
considered partially implemented.   
 
2. Consistent with the findings from the 2023 Report, the renewal and 
deactivations are not reviewed by a supervisor or otherwise subject to a 
multilevel review process, contrary to the 2023 recommendation which 
NYPD had accepted. NYPD policy requires a multilevel review process for 
activations but there is no process written into policy for renewals and 
deactivations, as a result, recommendation 3 is partially implemented.  
 
3. NYPD has i ssued an internal memorandum describing in detail the 
activation, renewal, and deactivation processes, discussed the  types of 
evidence necessary to support activation into the CGD, memorialized in 
writing the multilevel authorization process  for activation, provided some 
guidance related to completing the P erson Maintenance and Activation 
DD5s, explained the youth notification process for those under 18 activated 
into the CGD, and provided updated entry criteria. Despite this guidance, 
some reporting officers completed the Activation DD5s incorrectly. For 
example, on DD5s where two independent sources were required, there 
were reporting officers who listed themselves as one of the two sources. In 
another instance, the reporting officer listed themselves as an independent 
source when  the selected entry criteria  did not require that a source be 
named to support the activation. These findings were limited to a select few 
reporting officers. As a result, recommendation 4 is considered 
implemented.  
 
4. NYPD updated its IUP to include written guidance for the completion of 
Activation DD5s, which notes  “a written narrative and supporting 
documentation must accompany the recommendation for Criminal Group 
Database entry.” However, the IUP fails to provide specific details about 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 8 
 
the required content of that narrative or supporting documentation.  The 
Chief of Detectives Memorandum does provide sufficient direction , 
including more detail about the type of support necessary for the 
nomination. This finding is associated with recommendation 4 and is 
therefore considered implemented.  
 
5. NYPD generally improved the nature and extent of the narrative details 
and other supporting evidence included in the Activation and Person 
Maintenance DD5s. The DD5s included more details within the narrative 
section. Officers included URLs when required except in a few instances, as 
well as relevant screenshots for all individuals activated under Option A 
(1).
11 However, in the instance where two independent sources were 
identified for activation, the information derived from the sources to justify 
a nomination was general in nature, appearing to be boilerplate language. 
Some sources did not provide any context for their “reasonable belief” of an 
individual’s criminal group membership. Supportive narratives from 
sources generally stated that “in conference with the field intelligence 
officer, they had knowledge that the individual was a member of, or known 
to the precinct as a member of a specific gang.”  Because NYPD has provided 
written guidance about the application of the entry criteria, 
recommendation 4 is considered implemented, however officers should be 
instructed to document the specific information  from independent sources 
that supports a determination of gang membership. 
 
6. While NYPD updated its CGD IUP and issued a Chief of Detectives 
Memorandum to address the circumstances that can justify renewal , it 
provided limited guidance related to the completion of renewal DD5s within 
the IUP. However, the Chief of Detectives Memorandum does state if an 
individual remains within the database RTCC/SMART must include 
supporting documentation for continued inclusion. Since the Chief of 
Detectives Memorandum states that supporting documentation must be 
included for continued inclusion, r ecommendation 5 is considered 
implemented. 
  
7. Within its IUP, NYPD changed those who could recommend someone for 
entry from a precinct field intelligence officer, an investigator assigned to a 
Detective Bureau Gang Squad , or an investigator assigned to the Social 
Media Analysis and Research Team , to NYPD personnel from the 
 
11 Option 1 is when an individual admits their membership within the criminal group to a member of 
NYPD, or admits by using language and symbols of membership on their own social media account.  
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 9 
 
Intelligence Bureau, Detective Bureau Borough Narcotics Commands, and 
Detective Bureau Gun Violence Suppression Unit and its sub -commands. 
According to NYPD, these individuals have narrow investigative functions 
with a focus on high- crime areas and gang -related activity, and therefore 
are the appropriate units to nominate individuals into the CGD.  
 
8. With respect to qualifying conduct that justifies renewal into the database, 
(Recommendation 6), NYPD has updated its IUP to include an arrest “for a 
violent crime, possession of a weapon, or any other crime committed in 
furtherance of the criminal group’s activities” as qualifying conduct that is 
sufficient for renewal . As a result, recommendation 6 is considered  
implemented.  
 
9. In the  updated IUP and the  Chief of Detectives Memorandum , NYPD 
included a new YCO parental/guardian notification process for those under 
the age of 18, with notification required to take place within 60 days after 
activation into the database. Despite the update d IUP and the Chief of 
Detectives Memorandum , the Department failed to complete any 
notifications. The Office brought this issue to NYPD’s attention, and NYPD 
advised that a new procedure will be implemented that will require the 
nominating detective, not the YCO,  to notify the juvenile’s parent or 
guardian.  That procedural change is still pending.   As a result, 
recommendation 11 is considered partially implemented.  
 
10. NYPD updated the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to note that 
inclusion in the CGD  cannot be based on a sealed arrest , however, these 
updated policies do not address the issue of ensuring that officers d o not 
have access to sealed arrest information . DD5s clearly indicate that an 
arrest has been sealed, and information such as the complainant, or 
narrative about the incident is  unavailable. However, the arrest number , 
arrest date, and top arrest charge are still visible  on DD5s .  The 
Department has repres ented to this Office that it plans to change the 
activation and renewal DD5s so that they no longer contain this 
information, but this change has not yet been made. As a result, 
recommendation 13 is considered partially implemented.    
 
11. As noted above, NYPD included in the updated IUP and Chief of Detectives 
Memorandum that inclusion in the CGD cannot be based on a sealed arrest. 
There were 1 0 DD5s reviewed by O IG-NYPD that included cases where  
renewals were based on an arrest and all of the arrests were sealed at the 
time of OIG- NYPD’s review. The Office confirmed that four of the ten 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 10 
 
renewals were based on arrests that were sealed at the time of the renewal 
determination, but those  four determinations were made prior to the 
issuance of the Chief of Detectives Memorandum  that made clear that 
renewal can not be based on a sealed arrest . The other six arrests were 
sealed after the renewal determination, meaning that they were unsealed 
at the time the renewal determination was made, and appropriately relied 
on at that time.  As such, recommendation 14 is implemented.  
 
12. The 2023 Report found that the average delay for the review of entries was 
69.1 days for the entire sample, 28.9 days for adults, and 188.9 days for 
minors. For this review, delays were even longer with at least 15 1 entries 
(48 minors and 103 adults) between 6 and 60+ months past due at the time 
of their renewal or deactivation . OIG-NYPD conveyed those figures to 
NYPD during the course of this investigation and NYPD promptly 
undertook efforts to reduce any remaining delays . NYPD now represents 
that the maximum delay for renewal and deactivation review is eight days.  
 
13. The IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum makes it clear that those 
under 18 at the time of activation  or renewal must be reviewed every two 
years from the date of that activation or renewal ; and those 18 years or 
older at the time of  activation or renewal  must be reviewed every three 
years from the date of that activation or renewal. The Office’s investigation 
found that t he automated review system incorrectly extended the review 
time from two years to three years if a person was activated at 16 or 17 and 
turned 18 prior to their two-year review period. There were 59 individuals 
under 18 who were reviewed as part of this update. Forty-eight individuals 
were delayed for review from 6 to 60 months. According to NYPD this was 
due to a vendor coding error that has now been corrected. Moving forward 
those activated at 16 or 17 will be reviewed at their two-year review period.  
 
 
OIG-NYPD makes the following new recommendations based on the findings within 
this report: 
 
 
1. Ensure that all uniformed personnel authorized to nominate individuals 
into the CGD receive training about the requirements of the IUP and the 
Chief of Detectives Memorandum. 
 
2. Update the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to require the two 
independent reliable sources to provide substantive explanations for their 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 11 
 
reasonable belief of an individual’s criminal group membership  and to 
document those explanations on activation DD5s. 
 
3. Update the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to clarify that the 
two independent sources should be different from the reporting officer.  
 
4. Update the IUP to mirror the detailed guidelines included within the Chief 
of Detectives Memorandum.  
 
5. Update the IUP  and Chief of Detectives Memorandum  to reflect a 
multilevel review process for renewals and ensure that a supervisor reviews 
and signs off on all renewal DD5s, as previously recommended and accepted 
by the Department, and list the required supporting documentation. 
 
6. Update the IUP to require the nominating detective to notify the juvenile’s 
parent or guardian within 60-days of activation into the CGD.  
 
7. Update the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to ensure that 
renewal and activation 
DD5s include a required field containing the 
individual’s next review date.  
 
8. Create, and memorialize in writing, an internal audit requirement to 
ensure that notifications to parents of minors added to the database are 
made, that the associated Notification DD5s are completed, and that the 
notification appears within a new column i n the database as required by 
the Chief of Detectives Memorandum.  
 
9. Confirm whether any individual activated at age 16 or 17 has been in the 
database for over two years without a review, due to the coding error 
identified above and review any such individual to determine whether they 
should be renewed into the database or deactivated. 
 
10. Ensure that supporting documentation is included for all renewals.  
 
 
11. Conduct quarterly audits to ensure that there are no past due entries for 
review, and if there are, renew or deactivate them immediately.  
 
12. Review individuals renewed based on an arrest every six months to ensure 
that renewals are not based on arrests that are subsequently sealed. NYPD 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 12 
 
should at minimum explore whether it is feasible to audit renewals for this 
purpose.  
 
13. Collect, analyze, and publish data concerning the number of entries added, 
renewed, and deactivated from the database annually.  
 
II.      Background 
In 2017, advocacy group s and media outlet s revealed that the New York Police 
Department (“NYPD” or “the Department”) had crea ted and was using , for law 
enforcement purposes,  an electronic repository of information known as the 
Criminal Group Database ( “CGD”). The advocacy groups raised various questions 
and concerns about  the CGD, including  how individuals were added to it , the 
implications of inclusion, and the possible avenues for removal.12  
 
In June 2018 , the New York City Council held a hearing at which then-Chief of 
Detectives Dermot Shea stated the database contained the names of approximately 
17,000 individuals, about half the number that the database contained when it 
launched in 2013 .13 He testified that  in 2014,  the Department established 
procedures governing individuals’ inclusion in, and removal from, the database. In 
October 2018, in response to significant public concern about the database , as well as 
complaints received by the Office from members of the public and elected officials, the 
Office launched an investigation into NYPD’s creation and use of the CGD. The 
investigation sought to understand how NYPD used the database, its value in crime 
control and prevention activities, the potential harms of inclusion, and the risks and 
costs of maintaining the database . In April 2023 , the Office released its report  “An 
Investigation into NYPD’s Criminal Group Database.”   
 
To prepare the April 2023 Report , OIG-NYPD conducted an in -depth analysis of 
NYPD records concerning database entry and maintenance for a  sample of almost 
500 individuals, including demographic details of all of the then-active entries. The 
Office engaged in discussions about the value and impact of the database with NYPD 
representatives, legal experts, members of police oversight agencies, community 
organizations, and advocacy groups . OIG- NYPD also reviewed the policies of over 
 
12 See N.Y.C. Dep’t of Investigation, AN INVESTIGATION INTO NYPD’S CRIMINAL GROUP DATABASE (Apr. 
2023), at 11 -12, “The June 2018 City Council Hearing,” 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2023/16CGDRpt.Release04.18.2023.pdf . 
13 See N.Y.C. Dep’t of Investigation, AN INVESTIGATION INTO NYPD’S CRIMINAL GROUP DATABASE (Apr. 
2023), at 12- 14, “The June 2018 City Council Hearing,” 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2023/16CGDRpt.Release04.18.2023.pdf . 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 13 
 
three dozen police departments across the United States  that maintain so -called 
“gang” databases.14 The Office found an absence of sufficient guidance for entry  
criteria for activation into NYPD’s  database, a lack of compliance with the 
Department’s own procedures for inclusion of  individuals in the CGD, inadequate 
narrative detail and documentation purporting to support the Department’s decision 
to add or maintain an individual in the database, and a failure to notify families when 
their minor children were included in the database or provide a process to appeal the 
inclusion of minors.15  
 
On the basis of those findings, OIG-NYPD made 17 recommendations for changes to 
policy and practice intended to increase public awareness about the CGD; remediate 
the lack of guidance  regarding activation, renewal, and deactivation of entries into 
the database; ensure proper and timely notification to parents and guardians of 
minors included in the CGD; cease the use of sealed arrests for activation and renewal 
determinations; increase staffing to ensure timely entry reviews, formalize CGD-
related Freedom of Information Law (“ FOIL”) requests; and facilitate continuous 
auditing of the CGD  by OIG-NYPD to ensure the Department’s  implementation of 
accepted recommendations.16 
 
 NYPD’s 90-Day Response to DOI’s OIG-NYPD Recommendations 
On July 17, 2023, NYPD publicly responded to the Office’s r eport. It accepted 11 
recommendations (1-6, 11, 13-15, and 17), rejected five (7-9, 12, and 16), and  placed 
one under consideration (10).17  
 
The Department accepted the recommendations that it (1) publish a statement on its 
website describing the contributions of the CGD to maintaining  public safety; (2) 
revise the CGD Impact and Use Policy ( “IUP”) to provide more public insight into 
activation, renewal , and deactivation processe s; (3) ensure that multiple levels of 
authorization are required to add, renew or remove an individual from the database; 
(4) provide written guidance to officers regarding  the criteria and support ing 
documentation required to  add individuals to and remov e individuals from the 
database; (5) make parental/guardian notifications when a minor is added to the CGD 
within 60 days of inclusion; and (6) exclude sealed arrest information from activation 
and renewal determinations. 
 
14 See N.Y.C. Dep’t of Investigation, AN INVESTIGATION INTO NYPD’S CRIMINAL GROUP DATABASE (Apr. 
2023), at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2023/16CGDRpt.Release04.18.2023.pdf.  
15 Id. 
16 Id. 
17 Id. 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 14 
 
 
NYPD rejected recommendations  to (1) conduct an immediate review of all  
individuals in the database to determine whether they should remain or be removed; 
(2) conduct at more frequent intervals reviews  of minors and adults  to determine 
whether inclusion remains appropriate ; (3) make CGD entries inaccessible 60 days 
after the deadline for review of those entries ha d passed; (4) create a process for 
minors and their parents to appeal minors’ inclusion in the database; and (5) issue a 
written policy to provide individuals with information about whether they are 
included in the database if requested via FOIL.18   
 
As of the  date of the release of this Report, NYPD was  still considering the 
recommendation to convene a special review panel to approve adding  minors to the 
database.
19 A list of all recommendations are included within Appendix A and the full 
2023 report is available here. 
 
 Implementation of Recommendations 
 
A. Recommendations 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 13, and 14 – IUP Revision and 
Written Guidance as of October 2023 
 
In response to its acceptance of recommendations 2-6, 11, 13 and 14, NYPD updated 
its CGD Impact and Use Policy (“IUP”) 20 and issued a Chief of Detectives 
Memorandum, which provides guidance to officers as it relates to the database . The 
revision to the IUP and the memorandum reflected the policy and procedure changes 
NYPD agreed to implement in its response to OIG-NYPD’s April 2023 Report.21 Those 
changes included: 
 
• An updated activation requirement from two distinct sets of criteria to one set 
of criteria for entry 
• A shift in who  may recommend individuals for entry from Field Intelligence 
Officers (“FIOs”) or investigators in either the Detective Bureau’s Gang Squad 
 
18 The recommendations described are Recommendations 7, 8, 9, 12 and 16. 
19 See N.Y.C. Police Dep’t. Response to “An Investigation into NYPD’s Criminal Group Database,” (Jul. 
17, 2023), at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/oignypd/response/CGD_Response_71723_FINAL.pdf .  
20 In 2020, New York City Council passed the Public Oversight of Surveillance Technology (POST) Act 
requiring comprehensive reporting and oversight of NYPD’s surveillance technologies. Among other 
directives, the POST Act requires NYPD to produce and publish Impact and Use Policies (“IUPs”) for 
each of its qualifying surveillance technologies. NYPD must describe the capabilities of its surveillance 
technology, and include any rules, processes, and guidelines that regulate access to or use of the 
technology, and any prohibitions or restrictions on its use, and any potential disparate impacts.  
21 Both versions of the Department’s CGD IUP can be found in Appendices B and C. 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 15 
 
or the Social Media Analysis and Research Team ( “S.M.A.R.T.”) to NYPD 
personnel within the Intelligence Bureau, Detective Bureau Borough 
Narcotics Commands, and Detective Bureau Gun Violence Suppression Unit 
and its sub-commands 
• Clarification regarding the multilevel review process for activation.  
 
Additionally, the IUP provided details of the newly created notification process by the 
Youth Coordination Officer ( “YCO”) for minors added to  the CGD. According to the 
IUP, a family member legally responsible for the minor child must be notified within 
60-days of the minor’s activation into the database. As an update to its Rules, 
Processes & Guidelines section  of the IUP , guidance was provided for completing a 
nomination to add an individual to the database ,
22 including a requirement that  
supporting documentation be included. In addition, on October 11, 2023, the Chief of 
Detectives circulated a memorandum to all agency personnel designated, “Protocol 
for Nominees into Enterprise Case Management System’s Criminal Group 
Database,” which outlined the revised guidelines and protocols for adding entries into 
the CGD . Th e protocol outlined in the memorandum  included multiple levels of 
authorization to add individual names to the database, changes to the criteria for 
adding individuals to, and removing them from the database, and described the 
process for notifying parents and/or guardians of minor children who were added to 
the database.
23  
 
B. An Assessment of the CGD IUP and Chief of Detectives 
Memorandum 
This section assesses whether NYPD’s revisions to the CGD IUP and issuance of the 
Chief of Detectives Memorandum complied with recommendations 2 -6, 11, 13 , and 
14.  
i. Recommendation 2 
 
Within 180 days, NYPD should revise the IUP for the CGD to describe the activation, 
renewal, and deactivation processes, explain the nature and extent of the evidence 
required to satisfy the entry criteria, and identify by name the law enforcement and 
other external entities with whom NYPD may share information about the individuals 
included in the CGD, for investigative or other purposes. The document should also 
describe the security protections that prevent unauthorized parties, within or outside 
of NYPD, from accessing the CGD. 
 
22 A nomination occurs when specific NYPD personnel complete the Person Maintenance and 
Activation DD5s including supporting documentation. There are three levels of sign -off for the 
nomination and once final approval has been given the individual is activated into the CGD.  
23 This is a non -publicly available document and was provided to OIG -NYPD only as a part of an 
administrative request for materials relevant to the follow-up review.   
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 16 
 
 
NYPD updated the CGD IUP within 88 days of accepting this recommendation . The 
updated IUP  reflected a change in the criteria for activation and renewal,  an 
explanation of the processes  for activation , and a d escription of the units within 
NYPD responsible for proposing individuals to be added to the CGD. However, the 
IUP does not identify by name the law enforcement and other external entities with 
whom NYPD may share information.  
 
In 2023, OIG -NYPD found that the criteria to enter a person into the CGD was 
confusing and redundant . Specifi cally, the pre -October 2023 criteria for entry 
included two distinct sets of criteria for  entry. The  set, referred to as Option A, 
consisted of “[s]ome form of acknowledgement of membership, by either Option 1a) a 
self-admission of criminal group membership to a member of the NYPD; Option 2a) 
being identified as a member of a criminal group by two independent and reliable 
sources; or 3a) social media posts admitting to membership in a criminal group.” The 
second pathway, referred to as Option B: 
required two (2) of the following to be true: 1b) frequent presence at a 
known criminal group location; 2b) possession of criminal group-related 
documents; 3b) association with known criminal group members; 4b) 
social media posts with known criminal group members while 
possessing known criminal group paraphernalia; 5b) scars and tattoos 
associated with a particular criminal group; or 6b) frequent wearing of 
the colors and frequent use of hand signs that are associated with 
particular criminal groups.
24 
 
When NYPD updated the CGD IUP pursuant to recommendation 2, it eliminated 
Option B. Accordingly, in order to be entered into the CGD, the updated IUP requires 
(1) the individual to exhibit some form of personal acknowledgement of criminal 
group membership, by either a self -admission of criminal group membership to a 
member of the NYPD or a self -admission of criminal group membership on the 
person’s own social media account(s), or (2)  a reasonable belief that the person is a 
member of a criminal group during the course of an investigation and that the person 
is identified as a member of a criminal group by two independent and reliable 
sources.
25 The updated policies eliminated the confusion and redundancies in relation 
to activation criteria.   
NYPD also changed who could recommend someone f or entry. Pursuant to current 
policies, t hose individuals  include NYPD personnel from the Intelligence Bureau, 
 
24 See Appendix C.  
25 See Appendix B.  
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 17 
 
Detective Bureau Borough Narcotics Commands, and Detective Bureau Gun Violence 
Suppression Unit and its sub -commands. This is a change from the previous list of  
NYPD personnel which included a precinct field intelligence officer; an investigator 
assigned to a Detective Bureau Gang Squad; or an investigator assigned to the Social 
Media Analysis and Research Team. When asked about this change, NYPD personnel 
explained that the individuals now authorized to recommend additions to the 
database have investigative roles with a discrete focus on high-crime areas and gang 
related activity and therefore are better situated to identify individuals who may be 
gang-affiliated.  
NYPD expanded the IUP ’s description of the processes for activation, to include a 
more detailed discussion of the approval process including how the nomination is 
reviewed, what documentation is required as part of the nomination, and the levels 
of necessary approval. While the IUP states that individuals are reviewed every two 
years for minors and three years for adults, along with renewal criteria, it d oes not 
provide a description of the process . The Chief of Detectives Memorandum provide d 
more specific and detailed information related to the processes and requirements for 
activation, the documentation  required to be included with the DD5 supporting 
nomination, and the updated list of those nominating commands. With regard to the 
review process for renewal or deactivation, the memorandum reiterates the two- and 
three-year review periods and criteria for renewal noted within the IUP , and notes 
that RTCC/SMART must include supporting documentation as att achments for all 
renewals.  
 
This more expansive description of the activation process in both the IUP and 
memorandum is clear and instructive. With regard to the review for renewal process, 
the review section of the IUP should list the required supporting documentation for 
renewals. And both the memorandum and IUP should include a multilevel sign -off 
requirement like the activation process.  This would meet the renewal and 
deactivation process requirements of recommendation 3.  
 
As it relates to sources for activation, the Chief of Detectives Memorandum notes that 
precinct, Intelligence, or Detective Bureau personnel are  independent and reliable 
sources. The IUP and internal memorandum require that the person being nominated 
“…is identified as a member of a criminal group by two (2) independent and reliable 
sources.”
26 But these two documents do not make clear NYPD’s position that the two 
 
26 See Appendix B at 42. 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 18 
 
independent sources must be persons other than the officer(s) nominating individuals 
for activation.27  
 
ii. Recommendation 3 
 
NYPD should require a multilevel review process (memorialized in writing) for the 
activation, renewal, and deactivation of all entries in the CGD, supported by the 
signature of each reviewer where required. 
 
In response to Recommendation 3, NYPD updated its IUP expanding and clarifying 
the review process  for those individuals nominated to be added into the CGD. 
According to the IUP:  
 
“A written narrative and supporting documentation must accompany 
the recommendation for Criminal Group Database entry. A supervisor 
of the individual submitting a candidate for nomination into the 
Criminal Group Database then review[s] the materials and adopt[s] the 
recommendation. The recommendation is then reviewed by the Real 
Time Crime Center, Social Media Analysis and Research Team and the 
Real Time Crime Center, Social Media Analysis and Research Team 
supervisor, who will either approve or reject the r ecommendation, or 
request additional analysis be performed before making a decision. If 
the Real Time Crime Center, Social Media Analysis and Research Team 
and the Real Time Crime Center, Social Media Analysis and Research 
Team supervisor approves the reco mmendation, then the subject is 
entered into the database.”
28 
 
The Chief of Detectives Memorandum similar ly notes that the supervisor of the 
investigating officer making the recommendation must review the supporting 
documentation, and if one or more criteria is met and supported,  the supervisor will 
sign-off. The recommendation and supporting documentation are  then sent to 
NYPD’s Real-Time Crime Center/Social  Media Analysis Unit  (“RTCC/SMART”) for 
its secondary review and approval by a supervisor, also known as an endorser. Once 
reviewed and approved, the individual is then activated into the CGD.  
While clear and sufficient direction was provided in both the updated IUP and the 
Chief of Detectives Memorandum related to the two- level review and approval 
 
27 A detective from the Real Time Crime Center, Social Media Analysis and Research Team , 
responsible for approving nominations , informed this Office that there should be two independent 
sources separate from the nominating officer. 
28 See Appendix B.  
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 19 
 
process for activations, neither document specifies a multilevel review process for 
renewals, and there is currently no such process in place. Renewal DD5s include only 
two signature boxes, one for the reporting officer and the reviewing supervisor when 
three should be required for a multi -level review process . Indeed, NYPD’s current 
process for renewal determinations involves a single decisionmaker with no review; 
the same individual signs both signature boxes as the reporting officer and reviewing 
supervisor.     
  
iii. Recommendation 4   
 
NYPD should provide written guidance to officers explaining how to apply the Option 
A and B entry criteria, including examples of the type and extent of evidence that is 
sufficient for activation. 
 
In response to Recommendation 4, NYPD updated its IUP and removed Option B as 
an entry criterion. Although the Department updated its IUP, it is silent on the type 
and extent of evidence that is sufficient for activation. The Chief of Detectives 
Memorandum provided a slightly more detailed explanation of the criteria for 
inclusion and the required evidence to supplement the recommendation. T he 
memorandum explicitly states that “the social media address (URL) and screenshot 
of posting(s) must be included as an attachment to the DD5.”29 
 
While the IUP and memorandum identifies the criteria for entry, the second pathway 
for entry, “…during the course of an investigation, there is reasonable belief that the 
subject is a member of a criminal group, and that person is identified as a member of 
a criminal group by two (2) independent and reliable sources,” does not explicitly state 
that a reporting officer should not also list themselves as a n independent source, 
though the office understands that is NYPD’s position. 
 
iv. Recommendation 5  
 
NYPD should provide written guidance for officers about how to complete the Person 
Maintenance, Activation, and Renewal DD5s for the maintenance and entry of 
individuals into the CGD and  should include a requirement that available 
documentation be attached to the DD5s to substantiate that entry criteria are satisfied. 
 
 
29 This is a non -publicly available document and was provided to OIG -NYPD only as a part of an 
administrative request for materials relevant to the follow-up review.   
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 20 
 
In response to Recommendation 5, NYPD updated its IUP to include written guidance 
for the completion of DD5s related to nominating individuals for activation into the 
CGD, as well as noting that supporting documentation is required. While the 
Department provided guidance within the IUP, that guidance was non -specific, 
simply stating that “a written narrative and supporting documentation must 
accompany the recommendation for Criminal Group Database entry.” The IUP does 
not provide direction related to how to  complete the documents, however, the Chief 
of Detectives Memorandum  provides sufficient guidance and specifically notes the  
type of support necessary for the nomination.  Despite this guidance, our review 
identified narratives in support of activation that appeared to use boilerplate, non -
specific language.  Officers should be trained to provide information that is particular 
to the individual being added to the database.  
 
Neither the IUP nor memorandum provides guidance for completing renewal DD5s.   
 
v. Recommendation 6  
 
NYPD should create a list of police encounters and arrest types that constitute 
“qualifying police contact,” for purposes of renewal determinations, to be used by 
officers responsible for deciding whether to renew or deactivate individuals from the 
CGD.   
 
In response to Recommendation 6 , NYPD updated its IUP to include the following 
details related to the review of individuals into the database  for renewal or 
deactivation:  
“Subjects included in the Criminal Group Database must be reviewed to 
determine if their actions and records warrant continued inclusion. If a 
subject is under the age of eighteen (18), the subject is reviewed every 
two (2) years from date of entry.
30 If the subject is eighteen (18) years 
old or older, the subject is reviewed every three (3) years from date of 
entry. NYPD personnel are automatically notified when a subject is 
eligible for removal review. Subjects must be removed from the Criminal 
Group Database unless one of the following is true: 
1. The subject was arrested for a violent crime, possession of a weapon, or any 
other crime committed in furtherance of the criminal group’s activities; 
 
30 Until recently, minors who were activated at 16 or 17 and turned 18 prior to their two -year review 
period were reviewed at three years instead of two years due to a database programming error. NYPD 
confirmed on July 8, 2025 that the error was corrected by the database vendor, and that all individuals 
added to the database before age 18 are now reviewed at two years from the date of activation.  
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 21 
 
2. The subject is on parole or probation at the time of review; or 
3. The subject is in custody the of any local city, state, or federal correctional 
facility or similar complex at the time of removal review.” 
An NYPD official confirmed that “a violent crime, possession of a weapon, or any 
other crime committed in furtherance of the criminal group’s activities” is intended 
to represent the list of police encounters and arrest types. The Chief of Detectives 
Memorandum mirrors this language. OIG-NYPD finds this to be sufficient 
implementation of recommendation 6.  
 
vi. Recommendation 11  
 
NYPD should notify parents or guardians of minors that their children have been 
included in the CGD, within 60 days of inclusion, unless notification would interfere 
with active criminal investigations. 
 
In response to Recommendation 11, NYPD updated its IUP to require that guardians 
be notified when an individual under the age of 18 is added to the database. The Chief 
of Detectives Memorandum gives clear direction related to youth notifications. 
According to the memorandum “upon being notified by an NYPD investigator that an 
individual who is a juvenile has been activated into the CGD, the precinct YCO is 
required to notify the guardian of the activation. ” Notification to the family member 
or guardian must be documented on a “YCO Criminal Group Member Notification” 
DD5. In addition, as confirmation that the notification  was made , a new column 
noting the YCO’s supervisor sign-off will appear on the CGD export.”
31 
While the Department  now provides clear dire ctives in both the IUP and Chief of 
Detectives Memorandum concerning the youth notification process, consistent with 
Recommendation 11 , the required notifications are not being made, as discussed 
further below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 A spreadsheet that identifies all individuals added to the database who are under the age of 18. The 
CGD export is not publicly available, but was provided to OIG-NYPD in connection with this review.   
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 22 
 
vii. Recommendation 13  
 
NYPD should ensure that officers completing Person Maintenance, Activation , and 
Renewal forms do not have access to sealed arrest information for that purpose, 
including, but not limited to ensuring that these DD5 forms do not autofill with sealed 
arrest information, unless explicitly authorized by law. 
 
In response to Recommendation 1 3, NYPD included additional language within the 
IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum stating that “inclusion or maintenance in 
the Criminal Group Database cannot be based on a sealed arrest ;”32 and that “any 
sealed arrest cannot be the basis for including or maintaining an individual within 
the CGD ,”33 respectively. While the updated IUP and memorandum stat es that 
inclusion and maintenance within the CGD cannot be based on a sealed arrest, it does 
not address or implement the  Office’s recommendation that officers do not have  
access to sealed arrest information.34 DD5s clearly indicated that an arrest had been 
sealed, and information such as the complainant or narrative about the incident are 
unavailable, however, the arrest number, arrest date, and top arrest charge are still 
visible on DD5s. NYPD has represented to this Office that it will change the DD5s so 
that they do not contain this information in the future . Recommendation 13 is 
considered partially implemented. 
viii. Recommendation 14  
 
NYPD should not consider sealed arrests when making CGD activation and renewal 
determinations. 
 
In response to Recommendation 14, NYPD updated the IUP to specifically note that 
“inclusion or maintenance in the Criminal Group Database cannot be based on a 
sealed arrest.”35 The Chief of Detectives Memorandum conveys the same information.  
However, as discussed more thoroughly below, in some cases that the Office reviewed, 
the renewal DD5 indicated that an individual remained in the database due to a new 
arrest, and the only  “new arrest” reflected in the documentatio n available to this 
Office was marked sealed. OIG- NYPD reviewed certain DD5s reflecting that 
renewals were based on arrests that were sealed at the time of the determination , 
 
32 See Appendix B. 
33 This is a non -publicly available document and was provided to OIG -NYPD only as a part of an 
administrative request for materials relevant to the follow-up review.   
34 NYPD is currently in litigation over the Departments use and maintenance of sealed records. See. 
R.C. et al v. The City of New York et al , filed in New York County Supreme Court, Case number #: 
15379/2018. 
35 See Appendix B.   
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 23 
 
but those renewals occurred prior to the issuance of the Chief of Detectives 
Memorandum. Other DD5s reflected renewals based on arrests that were unsealed 
at the time of the renewal determination but sealed at a later time . OIG-NYPD did 
not identify any renewals after the issuance of the Chief of Detectives Memorandum 
that were based on arrests that were sealed, and therefore, this recommendation is 
considered implemented.  
 
 Recommendations 3, 4, 5,  11, 13, and 14 - CGD Policy Changes  & 
Implementation 
To more fully assess NYPD’s progress related to recommendations 3 -5, 11, 13, and 
14, this section examines these policies in practice, through the review of DD5s  and 
information associated with a total sample of 531 individuals and interviews with 
NYPD personnel.36   
A. The Current Activation and Review Processes  
A detailed description of the updated activation process as set forth in the revised 
IUP and Chief of Detectives M emorandum, directs that members of certain 
commands, squads, sections and u nits named above are authorized to identify and 
nominate individuals for inclusion into the criminal group database. Individuals are 
eligible to be added to the database if they admit to being a member of a criminal 
group, by “exhibit[ing] some form of personal acknowledgement of criminal group 
membership by either a self -admission…to a member of NYPD or…on the subject’s 
own social media account(s),” or if NYPD finds that “during the course of an 
investigation, there is a reasonable belief that the subject is a member of a criminal 
group, and that person is identified as a  member of a criminal group by two (2) 
independent and reliable sources.” Sources for this purpose can include Department 
personnel in an NYPD precinct, the Intelligence Bureau, the School Safety Division, 
or the Detective Bureau; personnel from the Depart ment of Correction; or external 
law enforcement agency personnel.   
 
An officer must complete two forms, known as the Activation DD5 and the Person 
Maintenance DD5, to nominate an individual for activation in to the database . The 
Activation DD5 includes a narrative section that must describe the specific factors 
that support adding the individual to the database, and that form must be submitted 
to an immediate supervisor for approval, with supporting documentation attached. A 
 
36 OIG-NYPD requested documentation associated with a total of 531 individuals, this included 148 
activation DD5s, and 384 renewal and deactivation DD5s.  One individual was renewed in error, and 
deactivated nearly a year later, the office received both renewal and deactivation DD5s for this person. 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 24 
 
supervisor then reviews the submitted documentation and “if one or more of the 
criteria are satisfied and supported by that documentation, the supervisor documents 
their agreement by signing the “ Activate Person into Criminal Group List ” DD5, a 
form that is automatically sent to the RTCC/SMART for approval , or “endorsement” 
along with the Person Maintenance DD5 . Once submitted and approved, the 
individual’s name is added to the database. The Person Maintenance DD5 cites the 
same information as the activation DD5, but does not require a supervisor to sign off. 
 
When a minor is added to the CGD, the supervisor of the YCO in the precinct where 
the minor resides must be notified , and within 60 days, the YCO is directed to visit 
the minor’s parent or guardian to inform them that their minor child has been added 
to the database. Notification is not made if it would alert the individual of an ongoing 
investigation; in that event, the investigator must document that notification cannot 
be made for that reason.  A total of 42 DD5s for those under 18 noted explicitly that 
a notification could not be made or was not made because it would compromise an 
investigation, and an additional 11 DD5s simply noted “case open” or “case active.”  
 
Entries must be evaluated for continued inclusion every two years from the date of 
activation for minors and every three years for adults.  Entries will be removed unless 
at least one of three criteria are met: 1) the individual has been arrested for an 
enumerated crime, unless the arrest is sealed; 2) the individual is participating in 
parole or a probation agreement; or 3) the individual is in the custody of a correctional 
facility.  
 
Recommendation 17 from the 2023 Report, which NYPD accepted, requires NYPD to 
“provide a random sample (including minors) of all Activation, Renewal and 
Deactivation DD5s and any supporting documentation to OIG -NYPD for review. ”
37 
OIG-NYPD requested exports of the full database, one in March 2024 and another  
updated in June 2024, to identify all new entries since the October, 2023 updated IUP 
and Chief of Detectives Memorandum. DD5s associated with those entries were used 
to assess the extent of NYPD’s adherence to the updated IUP and Chief of Detectives 
Memorandum as it relates to recommendations 3-5, 11, 13, and 14.  
 
B. Results of Review of Active CGD Entries as of June 26, 2024 
As of Ju ne 26, 2024, there were a  total of 1 3,989 active entries within  the CGD , 
slightly over 13% less than the 16,141 entries included in the database as of December 
2022. Of the 13,989 active entries, 1 3,701 identified as male,  268 as female; for 20 
 
37 See N.Y.C. Dep’t of Investigation, AN INVESTIGATION INTO NYPD’S CRIMINAL GROUP DATABASE (Apr. 
2023), at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2023/16CGDRpt.Release04.18.2023.pdf . 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 25 
 
individuals gender identification data were not available . By race, 9,860 (70.5%) of 
those included identified as Black  and 3,949 (28.2%) identified as Hispanic. Of the 
remaining approximately 1%, 82 (0.59%), identified as White; 68 (0.49%) as Asian or 
Pacific Islander or American Indian; 30 (0.21.2%) selected the “Other” category. With 
respect to age, 7 ,435 (53%) of individuals in the CGD were  added to the database  
between the ages of 18 -24 years and 4,209 (30%) between the ages of 25 -34 years. 
11% (1,576) of the individuals in the CGD  were added as minors (under age 18) the 
vast majority (1,301) at 16 or 17 years old.  
As of October 6, 2025, NYPD reported to this Office that there were currently 8,563 
active entries in the database, which is about a 39% decline from the 13,989 active 
entries in June 2024.  
 
i. Analysis of the Activation Process 
 
In June and August of 2024 OIG-NYPD requested DD5s related to all new entries  
since October 2023, for a total of 148 individuals.  In response to this request, NYPD 
produced DD5s for a total of 148 individuals within the database, 80 minors and 68 
adults, all of whom were added to the database between October 14, 2023,  and June 
26, 2024.   
a. Recommendation 3 - Multilevel Review Process 
 
According to the IUP and memorandum, the supervisor of the reporting officer 
reviews the DD5 and supporting documentation, and if the criteria is met and 
supported, the supervisor will sign th e DD5, indicating approval of the proposal to 
add an individual to the database. The DD5 and supporting documentation receives 
a secondary review and approval by a supervisor in the RTCC/SMART Unit, who then 
endorses the recommendation by signing the DD5.  
 
As required by NYPD policy, officers adhered to the multilevel review process for all 
activations in the sample that the Office reviewed , except one. In that one instance, 
the individual was identified during a social media canvass and activated without the 
two levels of review, with the reporting officer signing on his own behalf and on behalf 
of the reviewing supervisor, which does not comply with the NYPD’s policy. 
 
 
 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 26 
 
b. Recommendation 4 - Application of Entry Criteria & Recommendation 
5 – Support for Entries 
 
As noted within the IUP and memorandum, to be entered into the CGD, (1) the 
individual must acknowledge criminal group membership, by either a self-admission 
of membership to a member of  NYPD or a self -admission of membership on the 
person’s own social media account(s), or (2) there must be a reasonable belief that the 
person is a member of a criminal group during the course of an investigation and that 
the person is identified as a member of a criminal group by two independent and 
reliable sources. 
Of the 148 activation DD5s assessed, 1 3 were activated based on self -admission 
during a debrief , 97 were activated based on social media posts  exclusively, seven 
were activated based on social media posts and sources, and the remaining 31 were 
activated based on two sources. Consistent with the 2023 report, the most frequently 
used reason for activation was self-admission of criminal group membership via the  
individual’s own social media account.
38  
Of those 31 that listed two sources, four of those activations included the reporting 
officer as one of the two sources. According to the supervisor in the RTCC/SMART 
Unit responsible for approving activations, there should be two separate independent 
sources, neither of which should be the officer making the nomination. Neither the 
updated IUP or Chief of Detectives Memorandum clarifies that the two independent 
sources should be different than the reporting officer. 
 
In addition to the criteria noted above, the IUP and memorandum states that a URL 
and screenshot of the posting(s) must be included as support for self-admission on the 
person’s own social media account. For those entries activated via self-admission on 
social media, all DD5s included embedded images/links in the form of either/or social 
media postings, videos, or audio files.   The Office examined the embedded images, 
although they were too small to clearly see and assess the content . H owever, the 
associated narratives , which the Office reviewed,  almost always provided a 
description of the embedded images. There were 3 DD5s without a URL, where NYPD 
policy requires a URL, although there were screenshots of the social media postings 
included.   
 
 
38 The exact criteria as noted within the Chief of Detectives Memorandum is “(a) Nominee admits to 
criminal group membership in a statement to a member of the NYPD, OR (b) nominee admits to 
criminal group membership via the nominee’s own social media account[s], such as through the use of 
language and symbols demonstrating membership. The social media address (URL) and screenshot of 
posting(s) must be included as an attachment to the “Activate Person into Criminal Group List” DD5.  
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 27 
 
c. Recommendation 4 - Narrative Analysis 
 
All 148 sets of DD5s were reviewed for narrative completeness. Narratives were 
categorized based on self -admission by debriefing, self -admission based on social 
media observations, source recommendations, or a combination of any of the above. 
The narrative sections of both the Person Maintenance and Activation DD5s outlined 
the reasons for activation with more  specificity than those assessed for the 2023 
Report. While the narrative sections had improved, there were issues related to the 
use of boilerplate  language when two independent sources were required for 
nomination. For example, t here were 31 nominations  based on source 
recommendations. Six reporting officers completed this set of nominations, and three 
of those reporting officers were responsible for completing 19 of the 31  DD5s. The 
narratives associated with those 19 nominations lacked detail and appeared to be cut 
and pasted [see Figure 1]. One reporting officer conferred with the same two 
detectives quoting the same source narrative in at least six  instances, and in one 
instance included the incorrect name as a result of a cut/paste error.  Another 
reporting officer completed  six activation DD5s, using the same  language despite 
conferring with different detectives . In three instances this reporting officer also 
included themselves as one of the two independent sources. The third reporting officer 
completed seven activation  DD5s with different source recommenders, using the 
same language but changing the titles of the sources and the associated gangs.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 28 
 
Figure 1: Narrative Samples from Activation DD5s 
 
 
 
d.   Recommendation 11 - Youth Notifications 
 
The updated IUP and the Chief of Detectives Memorandum  require notifications to 
parents and guardians within 60  days of the inclusion of minors into the database.   
For 53 of the 8 0 minors added to the database, notifications were not ma de because 
the Department concluded that notifications could compromise an active 
investigation. T he existence of an active investigation was documented in the 
narrative section of the Activation or Person Maintenance DD5s, or elsewhere in the 
materials received.    
For 3 of the 17 entries where NYPD did not make notifications , the DD5 narrative 
stated that notification attempts will be made, but there was no other indication that 
the notification in fact was attempted or made.  In at least one of those three DD5s, 
the detective was reminded to make sure that the notification occurred [see Figure 
2]. The summary of investigation noted that the individual had been observed with 
other gang members via social media observations, and included three photos, one 
DD5 Narrative Examples 
Example Set 1 
Narrative 1a: 
 
Conferral with 75 FIO, informed through debriefings/work as an 
FIO, knowledge of ME as a gang member. Conferral with 
PSAYCO, informed through debriefing and work has knowledge 
that ME is a gang member. 
Narrative 1b: 
 
Conferral with 88 FIO, informed through debriefings/work as an FIO, 
knowledge of SGB as a gang member. Conferral with PSA 3 FIO, 
informed through debriefing and work has knowledge that SGB is a 
gang member. 
Example Set 2 
Narrative 2a: 
 
Conferral with 75 FIO, informed th rough debriefings/work as an 
FIO, knowledge of JJ as a gang member. Conferral with PSA 2 
YCO, informed through his duties has knowledge that JJ is a gang 
member. 
Narrative 2b: 
 
Conferral with 75 FIO, informed through debriefings/work as an FIO, 
knowledge of DY as a gang member. Conferral with 75NCO SGT, 
informed through his duties has knowledge that DY is a gang 
member. 
Example Set 3 
Narrative 3a: 
 
The undersigned did confer with PO Nieves-Santiago (PSA3 YCO) 
on 3/21/2024 who did inform that through debriefings and work as 
an FIO he has knowledge of Naim Jones as an 8 Trey Crip  gang 
member. The undersigned did confer with PO Guerrero (PSA3 
FIO) on 03/14/2024 who did inform that through his duties as FIO 
for PSA3 he has knowledge of Naim Jones as an 8 Trey Crip gang 
member.   
Narrative 3b: 
 
The undersigned did confer with PO Nieves-Santiago (PSA3 YCO) on 
3/21/2024 who did inform that through debriefings and work as an 
FIO he has knowledge of Alexis Duran  as an 8 Trey Crip  gang 
member. The undersigned did confer with PO Guerrero (PSA3 FIO) 
on 03/14/2024 who did inform that through his duties as FIO for PSA3 
he has knowledge of Alexis Duran as an 8 Trey Crime gang member.    
Example Set 4 
Narrative 4a: 
 
The undersigned did confer with Detective Goris (73 FIO) on 
03/14/2024 who did inform the  undersigned though their work in 
the Field Intelligence Offic e that he has knowledge of Malachi 
Demery to be a Folk Nation member. The undersigned did confer 
with Detective Fung (73 PDU) on 03/14/2024 who did inform the  
undersigned though their work in the Precinct Detective Squad 
that he has knowledge of Malachi De mery to be a  Folk Nation  
member. 
Narrative 4b: 
 
The undersigned  did confer with Detective Goris (73 FIO) on 
05/15/2024 who did inform the undersigned though their work in the 
Field Intelligence Office that he has knowledge of Prince Teran to be 
a Bloodhound Brims Gang member. The undersigned did confer with 
Detective Walsh (90 FIO) on 05/15/2024 who did inform the  
undersigned though their work in the Field Intellig ence Office that 
he has knowledge of Prince Teran to be a  Bloodhound Brims  Gang 
member. 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 29 
 
picturing the individual added to  the database with another individual and two 
picturing the individual alone. This activation was based on two independent sources, 
with the reporting officer listing himself as one of the two independent sources.  
Figure 2: DD5 Narrative for YCO notification advisement 
 
For another three  individuals out of the  17, a notation in the materials received 
indicated that parental notification had been made but there was no YCO Notification 
DD5 reflecting that notification was actually made, nor was there a new column on 
the CGD export , [a spreadsheet, ] confirming that a notification had occurred as 
required by policy. 
In response to an August 16, 2024,  request from OIG-NYPD for YCO Notification 
DD5s, NYPD advised the Office on February 26, 2025, that the Department plans to 
implement a new procedure that will require the detective nominating the juvenile 
for activation to notify the juvenile’s parent or guardian. The detective would remain 
responsible for completing the DD5 memorializing that the notification was either 
made, or would interfere with an active c riminal investigation. The DD5 would also 
require supervisory approval.  
 
ii. Analysis related to the Review Process 
 
To assess whether there w as timely review of entries in the database and whether 
deactivation and renewal DD5s were completed consistent with NYPD’s policies and 
procedures, OIG-NYPD also requested a sample of DD5s for individuals who were 
due for review between 2020 and 2024. The anticipated review date is either two or 
three years from the date of entry into the database, depending on whether the 
individual was below or above age 18 at the date of entry .
39 OIG-NYPD determined 
a representative sample to be 383 individuals –– OIG-NYPD ultimately reviewed 379 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 30 
 
entries for 378 individuals (59 entries were associated with individuals under 18 and 
320 were associated with individuals who were 18 and over).40  
 
All 379 entries were assessed using the individual’s age (younger than 18 or 18 and 
older) as provided within the CGD export and the actual review date  [see Table 1]. 
Of the 379 entries,  23 had been  reviewed on or before the scheduled due date.   
Twenty-one of the 2 3 were renewed due to an arrest and the remaining t wo were 
deactivated. One of the two was erroneously renewed and deactivated a year later.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 NYPD initially produced 338 renewal, deactivation, and person maintenance DD5s. Of those 338 
DD5s, 261 were renewal DD5s, 70 were deactivation DD5s, and seven were person maintenance DD5s.  
At the time, DD5s for an additional 47 individuals were not provided. NYPD advised that DD5s did 
not exist either because they could not be located or could not be accessed because of a technical issue. 
The Department confirmed that the electronic system that flags individuals in the database for review 
failed to flag 34 of the entries  due to a vendor coding error . As a result of follow -up with NYPD five 
individuals were removed from the sample leaving 379 entries for 378 individuals.  
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 31 
 
Table 1: All Entries Reviewed Separated by Adults and Minors 
 
 
 
Two hundred and five  entries were reviewed within 0 to 6 months of the scheduled 
review date. Of the 205 entries reviewed, 174 were renewed and 31 were deactivated. 
One hundred and forty-nine entries were delayed 6 to 60 months, and the remaining 
two entries were delayed 60 months or more. Of this total of  151, 87 of those were 
renewed and 64 were deactivated. 
 
In October 2023 NYPD updated its review process to a two-year review from the date 
of entry for those activated  as minors (under age 18) and a three -year review from 
the date of entry for those activated  at 18 or older. It should however be noted that  
NYPD can conduct a review at any time  based on its discretion.41 The prior review 
cycle was every three (3) years, and then on an individual’s twenty -third (23rd) and 
 
41 Renewals based on two- and three-year review cycles occur only if the individual was arrested for a 
violent crime, possession of a weapon, or another crime in furtherance of the group; the person is on 
parole or probation as the time of removal review; or the person is in custody.  

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 32 
 
twenty-eight (28th) birthdays for those 18 and older, and every two years if they were 
younger than 18 at the time of activation.  
 
a. Pre-Policy Update –– October 2023 
 
Two hundred and thirty-two (232) were reviewed prior to the updated IUP in October 
2023 [see Table 2]. All 232 entries were assessed by this Office to determine if there 
were any delays.  Thirteen (13) of the entries were individuals below 18 at the time 
of activation who should have been reviewed within two years of their activation date. 
One entry was reviewed on time and the remaining 1 2 entries were delayed for 
periods ranging from 6 to 30 months. Of those 1 3, ten (10) were renewed and three 
(3) were deactivated.  
 
The remaining 219 were all adults. Twenty-one (21) were reviewed on or before their 
scheduled date. One hundred thirty-five (135) were reviewed within 0 to 6 months of 
their scheduled date; 27 were 6 to 12 months past due; 32 were 12 to 18 months past 
due; and 4 were 18 to 24 months past due. Thirty-four (34) were deactivated and 185 
were renewed.  
 
In total, with respect to adults and minors collectively, out of the 232 entries reviewed 
prior to the updated IUP, 195 were renewed and 37 were deactivated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 33 
 
Table 2: Entries for Review – Before October 2023 
 
 
 
b. Post-Policy Update –– October 1, 2023 
 
One hundred and forty -six (146) entries were reviewed after October 1, 2023  to 
determine if there were delays in conducting the review. For those reviewed after the 
policy change, 4 6 were below 18 at the time of activation, and should have been 
reviewed within two years of their activation date. Ten (10) of those 46 were reviewed 
between 0 and 6 months of their respective activation dates, the remaining 36 were 
delayed between 6 and 60 months after the designated review date [see Table 3]. Of 
the 46 minors reviewed, 15 were deactivated, and 31 were renewed. 
 
The remaining 100 were adults. One entry was reviewed on or before its scheduled 
date; 5 9 were reviewed between 0 and 6 months after their respective dates, 38  
individuals were delayed between 6 and 48 months, and the remaining two were 
delayed more than 60 months . Of the 100 adults reviewed, 45 were deactivated and 
55 were renewed.  
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 34 
 
Table 3: Entries for Renewal/Deactivation Review – After October 2023 
 
 
 
 
OIG-NYPD engaged with NYPD in April 2025 regarding extensive delays in reviews 
that had been identified. The Department acknowledged those delays and on May 14, 
2025 provided a response noting that  the delays had been drastically reduced with 
the oldest case awaiting review for 11 days. At that same time NYPD noted that some 
individuals were missing renewal or deactivation DD5s because the system did not 
provide a notification for review, due to a programming error, and that others were 
not yet due.  NYPD subsequently advised that as of August 19, 2025 the maximum 
delay was eight days.  

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 35 
 
Since then, in response to an additional request  from OIG-NYPD the Department 
identified at least two additional errors . In September, NYPD  noted that it had 
identified 3,846 database entries that had not been placed in queue for renewal and 
deactivation when they were due. At that time NYPD noted that it had cleared that 
backlog—deactivating 3,478 entries and renewing 368 entries. Then in October, the 
Department advised that an additional vendor coding error was found that impacted 
the review date of an additional 1,959 people. NYPD noted that as of September 19, 
2025, 33 out of the 1,959 remained overdue and those individuals had been reviewed 
as of October 6, 2025 ; 23 were renewed and 10 were deactivated. The Department 
also committed to quarterly checks of the CGD for proper technical function and 
agreed to provide confirmation to OIG -NYPD that the code continues to run  
consistently with Department policy. 
 
 
c. Review for Renewal and Deactivation of Minors 
 
NYPD acknowledged that the two-year period had been extended an additional year 
for those individuals who turned 18 prior to their two -year review cycle due to a n 
error impacting the algorithm that set the review dates for individuals within the 
database.  
 
That algorithmic error added an additional year for the review  of individuals 
activated into the database before they turned 18.  Based on the sample OIG -NYPD 
reviewed, fifty-nine of the 378 individuals  within the sample were younger than 18 
at the time of activation and should have been reviewed two years following 
activation. All 59 entries were assessed for delays [see Table 4]. Of the 59 entries, 1 
was completed on time; 10 were completed within 0 to 6 months of the scheduled 
review; 5 were past due by 6 to 12 months; and the remaining 43 had delays ranging 
from 12 to 60 months. Of the 59 entries, 18 were deactivated and 41 were renewed. 
 
On July 8, 2025, the Department confirmed that the error had been corrected by the 
vendor, such that thereafter, all individuals activated into the CGD under age 18 will 
be reviewed every two years from the date of activation pursuant to the October 2023 
Chief of Detectives Memorandum. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 36 
 
Table 4: Delay Analysis of the 59 Entries Reviewed 
 
 
 
d. Recommendation 3 – Multilevel Review Process for Renewal and 
Deactivation 
 
While NYPD accepted recommendation 3, which proposes a multilevel review process 
for activations, renewals, and deactivations, NYPD updated it s policies to require a 
multilevel review process for activations  only.  As  a result, the renewal DD5 only 
provides for a re porting officer and re viewing supervisor to sign -off, requiring what 
appears to be two levels of review but not three, as the activation requires [see Figure 
3 for renewal DD5 and Figure  4 for activation DD5]. In the renewal documentation 
that this Office reviewed, there was in fact only one level of review  for those DD5s, 
because the member of RTCC/SMART signed the form twice, as both the reporting 
officer and the reviewing supervisor.   Therefore, NYPD should ensure at minimum 
that an independent supervisor reviews and signs off on all renewal DD5s , that is, 
there are at least two levels of review for renewal determinations. 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 37 
 
Figure 3:  
 
Figure 4: 
 
e. Recommendation 5 – Application of Guidance to Renewal DD5s 
 
As noted earlier, per NYPD policy, individuals renewed into the database prior to 
October 2023 were reviewed every two (2) years if under 18, every three (3) years  if 
18 and older from the date that they were added to the database, and again on their 
twenty-third (23rd) and twenty -eight (28th) birthdays to determine if renewal was 
necessary. The IUP did not provide guidance as to when removal was or was not 
necessary. The April 11, 2021 IUP simply stated that the individuals are reviewed 
“…to determine if t heir actions and records warrant continued inclusion.”42  
Two hundred and thirty -two (232) individuals were reviewed by  NYPD prior to 
October 2023 and 195 were renewed. Of those 195, one hundred seventeen (117) were 
arrested, 18 were in custody, 10 were on parole or probation, 2 9 had police contact 
within 3 years, and 21 listed “social media account active” as the reason for renewal. 
In October 2023, the Department updated its IUP to reflect the new review policy , 
and to require a review every  two years from the date of entry  for those activated 
 
42 See Appendix C 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 38 
 
when under 18 and a  review every  three years from the date of entry for those 
activated at the age of 18 or older. At the time of review, individuals must be removed 
unless one of the following is true: 
1. The subject was arrested for a violent crime, possession of a 
weapon, or any other crime committed in furtherance of the 
criminal group’s activities; 
2. The subject is on parole or probation at the time of removal 
review; or 
3. The subject is in the custody of any local city, state, or federal 
correctional facility or similar complex at the time of removal 
review. 
One hundred forty-six (146) were reviewed by NYPD after October 1 5, 2023, and 86 
of those were renewed. Of those 86, all except one was renewed for reasons consistent 
with the updated IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum . That individual had 
been renewed in error and later deactivated. 
Lastly, there was no supporting documentation attached to the renewal DD5s  to 
substantiate the fact of an arrest, parole, probation or custody  as required by the 
Chief of Detectives Memorandum.  
 
f.  Recommendation 13 and 14 – Use of Sealed Records for Renewal 
Determinations  
 
The Office also learned that even when an arrest is sealed and reflected as such in 
materials visible to NYPD officers making activation and renewal determinations, 
the top arrest charge, date, and arrest number remains visible for sealed arrests. Per 
this Office’s prior recommendation, NYPD has committed to changing the activation 
and renewal DD5s so that they no longer contain this information.  
Additionally, t here were 1 0 renewal DD5s that indicated an individual was being 
renewed within the CGD based on a new arrest. The only “new arrest” in the 
documentation that this Office reviewed appeared to be sealed, but because the date 
of the sealing was not known to this Office, it was not clear whether the arrest was 
sealed at the time of renewal or was unsealed at that point but sealed thereafter . 
Upon follow-up with NYPD, the Office confirmed that four of the ten renewals were 
in fact  based on arrest s that were sealed  at the time of the renewal , but those  
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 39 
 
renewals occurred prior to the issuance of the Chief of Detectives Memorandum that 
made clear that renewals could not be based on sealed arrests . Another six were 
sealed after the renewal determination , such that the renewal was appropriately 
based on an arrest that was not sealed at the time the renewal determination was 
made.    
Every six months, NYPD should  review individuals  renewed based on arrests, to 
ensure that renewals were not based on an arrest that was subsequently sealed. At a 
minimum, NYPD should explore whether it is feasible to audit renewals on this basis.  
It is this Office’s position that individuals should be removed from the database if the 
only basis to include them is an arrest that is subsequently sealed.  
 
 Conclusion  
In response to the 2023 Report NYPD accepted 11 of the 17 issued recommendations, 
five were rejected, and one remains under consideration. This report focused on the 
implementation status of eight of the eleven recommendations. 43 Of those eight 
recommendations, four are assessed as fully implemented  and four are partially 
implemented. Two of the remaining three recommendations have also been fully 
implemented, while no progress has been made on the third. 
Consistent with a finding from the 2023 report  that stated that “…there was no 
mechanism that ensures that the reviews are actually conducted on schedule by 
NYPD staff,” this Office determined that extensive delays remain ed based on the 
samples that we assessed .44 NYPD has explained that the delays were due to a 
staffing shortage and  programming errors that have now been corrected, and has 
represented that the review delays are currently a matter of days, not weeks. To 
ensure that reviews are occurring as required by Departmental policy, NYPD will 
add a required field on all renewal and activation DD5s that will contain the 
individual’s next review date and will place individuals into a queue for review 15 
days in advance of the noted date. NYPD has also advised that it will conduct 
 
43 NYPD provided DD5s in response to Recommendation 17, those documents were used to assess 
NYPD’s implementation of recommendations 2-6, 11, 13-14.  The remaining two recommendations (1 
and 15) remain partially implemented. In response to recommendation 1, NYPD has not published a 
statement describing how the CGD contributes to public safety and violent crime reduction strategies. 
In response to recomm endation 15, NYPD acknowledged that the extensive delays in the renewal 
process were a result of RTCC Social Media Analysis & Research Team being short-staffed.   
44 See N.Y.C. Dep’t of Investigation, AN INVESTIGATION INTO NYPD’S CRIMINAL GROUP DATABASE (Apr. 
2023), page 6, at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2023/16CGDRpt.Release04.18.2023.pdf . 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 40 
 
quarterly checks of the technical function of the database to confirm that the code is 
running consistently with Department policy. 
NYPD confirmed that individuals who were activated into the database at 16 and 17 
years old and turned 18 prior to their two -year review period, should be reviewed at 
two years following their date  of activation, not three years. There were 5 9 
individuals who were under 18 when they were activated. Only one of the 59 had been 
reviewed on time, 10 were completed within 0 to 6 months, 5 were completed between 
6 and 12 months, but the remaining 43 had delays ranging from 12 to 60 months 
beyond the two years. T he Department advised that these delays were due to a 
database error  that has since been corrected. According to the Department, 
individuals activated into the database at age 16 and 17 will be reviewed at two years 
from the date of official activation pursuant to the October 2023 Chief of Detectives 
Memorandum.  
NYPD has made  substantial progress towards implementation of th ose accepted 
recommendations issued within the 2023 Report.  Of the eight recommendations 
assessed within this report, NYPD has fully implemented four and partially 
implemented the remaining four.  
 
Below is a summary of OIG-NYPD’s key findings, as well as 13 new recommendations 
for further improvement.  
 
 Summary of Key Findings and Recommendations 
Based on the documents provided by NYPD regarding recommendations 2 -6, 11, 13, 
and 14 from the 2023 Report, the Office makes the following findings: 
 
 
1. NYPD updated its CGD IUP within 88 days of accepting Recommendation 
2. The updated IUP described the activation process, and the changed 
criteria for renewal and deactivation of individuals. However, the IUP did 
not identify by name the law enforcement or external entities with whom 
the Department may share information. As a result, Recommendation 2 is 
considered partially implemented.   
 
2. Consistent with the findings from the 2023 Report, the renewal and 
deactivations are not reviewed by a supervisor or otherwise subject to a 
multilevel review process, contrary to the 2023 recommendation which 
NYPD had accepted. NYPD policy requires a multilevel review process for 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 41 
 
activations but there is no process written into policy for renewals and 
deactivations, as a result, recommendation 3 is partially implemented.  
 
3. NYPD has issued an internal memorandum describing in detail the 
activation, renewal, and deactivation processes, discussed the types of 
evidence necessary to support activation into the CGD, memorialized in 
writing the multilevel authorization process for activation, provided some 
guidance related to completing the Person Maintenance and Activation 
DD5s, explained the youth notification process for those under 18 activated 
into the CGD, and provided updated entry criteria. Despite this guidance, 
some report ing officers completed the Activation DD5s incorrectly. For 
example, on DD5s where two independent sources were required, there 
were reporting officers who listed themselves as one of the two sources. In 
another instance, the reporting officer listed themselves as an independent 
source when the selected entry criteria did not require that a source be 
named to support the activation. These findings were limited to a select few 
reporting officers. As a result, recommendation 4 is considered 
implemented.  
 
4. NYPD updated its IUP to include written guidance for the completion of 
Activation DD5s, which notes  “a written narrative and supporting 
documentation must accompany the recommendation for Criminal Group 
Database entry.” However, the IUP fails to provide specific details about 
the required content of that narrative or supporting documentation. The 
Chief of Detectives Memorandum does provide sufficient direction, 
including more detail about the type of support necessary fo r the 
nomination. This finding is ass ociated with recommendation 4 and is 
therefore considered implemented.  
 
5. NYPD generally improved the nature and extent of the narrative details 
and other supporting evidence included in the Activation and Person 
Maintenance DD5s. The DD5s included more details within the narrative 
section. Officers included URLs when required except in a few instances, as 
well as relevant screenshots for all individuals activated under Option A 
(1).
45 However, in the instance where two independent sources were 
identified for activation, the information derived from the sources to justify 
a nomination was general in nature, appearing to be boilerplate language. 
 
45 Option 1 is when an individual admits their membership within the criminal group to a member of 
NYPD or admits by using language and symbols of membership on their own social media account.  
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 42 
 
Some sources did not provide any context for their “reasonable belief” of an 
individual’s criminal group membership. Supportive narratives from 
sources generally stated that “in conference with the field intelligence 
officer, they had knowledge that the individual was a member of, or known 
to the precinct as a member of a specific gang.”  Because NYPD has provided 
written guidance about the application of the entry criteria, 
recommendation 4 is considered implemented, however officers should be 
instructed to document the specific information from independent sources 
that supports a determination of gang membership. 
 
6. While NYPD updated its CGD IUP and issued a Chief of Detectives 
Memorandum to address the circumstances that can justify renewal, it 
provided limited guidance related to the completion of renewal DD5s within 
the IUP. However, the Chief of Detectives Memora ndum does state if an 
individual remains within the database RTCC/SMART must include 
supporting documentation for continued inclusion. Since the Chief of 
Detectives Memorandum states that supporting documentation must be 
included for continued inclusion, recommendation 5 is considered 
implemented. 
  
7. Within its IUP, NYPD changed those who could recommend someone for 
entry from a precinct field intelligence officer, an investigator assigned to a 
Detective Bureau Gang Squad, or an investigator assigned to the Social 
Media Analysis and Research Team, to N YPD personnel from the 
Intelligence Bureau, Detective Bureau Borough Narcotics Commands, and 
Detective Bureau Gun Violence Suppression Unit and its sub -commands. 
According to NYPD, these individuals have narrow investigative functions 
with a focus on high- crime areas and gang -related activity and therefore 
are the appropriate units to nominate individuals into the CGD.  
 
8. With respect to qualifying conduct that justifies renewal into the database, 
(Recommendation 6), NYPD has updated its IUP to include an arrest “for a 
violent crime, possession of a weapon, or any other crime committed in 
furtherance of the criminal group’s activities” as qualifying conduct that is 
sufficient for renewal. As a result, recommendation 6 is considered 
implemented.  
 
9. In the updated IUP and the Chief of Detectives Memorandum, NYPD 
included a new YCO parental/guardian notification process for those under 
the age of 18, with notification required to take place within 60 days after 
activation into the database. Despite the  updated IUP and the Chief of 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 43 
 
Detectives Memorandum, the Department failed to complete any 
notifications. The Office brought this issue to NYPD’s attention, and NYPD 
advised that a new procedure will be implemented that will require the 
nominating detective, not the YCO, to notify the juvenile’s parent or 
guardian.  That procedural change is still pending.  As a result, 
recommendation 11 is considered partially implemented.  
 
10. NYPD updated the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to note that 
inclusion in the CGD cannot be based on a sealed arrest, however, these 
updated policies do not address the issue of ensuring that officers do not 
have access to sealed arrest information . DD5s clearly indicate that an 
arrest has been sealed, and information such as the complainant, or 
narrative about the incident is unavailable. However, the arrest number, 
arrest date, and top arrest charge are still visible on DD5s.  The 
Department has r epresented to this Office that it plans to change the 
activation and renewal DD5s so that they no longer contain this 
information, but this change has not yet been made. As a result, 
recommendation 13 is considered partially implemented.    
 
11. As noted above, NYPD included in the updated IUP and Chief of Detectives 
Memorandum that inclusion in the CGD cannot be based on a sealed arrest. 
There were 10 DD5s reviewed by OIG -NYPD that included cases where 
renewals were based on an arrest, and all of the arrests were sealed at the 
time of OIG -NYPD’s review. The Office confirmed that four of the ten 
renewals were based on arrests that were sealed at the time of the renewal 
determination, but those four determinations were made prior to the 
issuance of the Chief of Detectives Memorandum that made clear that 
renewal cannot be based on a sealed arrest. The other six arrests were 
sealed after the renewal determination, meaning that they were unsealed 
at the time the renewal determination was made, and appropriately relied 
on at that time.  As such, recommendation 14 is implemented.  
 
12. The 2023 Report found that the average delay for the review of entries was 
69.1 days for the entire sample, 28.9 days for adults, and 188.9 days for 
minors. For this review, delays were even longer with at least 151 entries 
(48 minors and 103 adults) between 6 and 60+ months past due at the time 
of their renewal or deactivation. OIG -NYPD conveyed those figures to 
NYPD during the course of this investigation and NYPD promptly 
undertook efforts to reduce any remaining delays. NYPD now represents 
that the maximum delay for renewal and deactivation review is eight days.  
 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 44 
 
13. The IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum makes it clear that those 
under 18 at the time of activation or renewal must be reviewed every two 
years from the date of that activation or renewal; and those 18 years or 
older at the time of activation or renewa l must be reviewed every three 
years from the date of that activation or renewal. The Office’s investigation 
found that the automated review system incorrectly extended the review 
time from two years to three years if a person was activated at 16 or 17 and 
turned 18 prior to their two-year review period. There were 59 individuals 
under 18 who were reviewed as part of this update. Forty-eight individuals 
were delayed for review from 6 to 60 months. According to NYPD this was 
due to a vendor coding error that  has now been corrected. Moving forward 
those activated at 16 or 17 will be reviewed at their two-year review period.  
 
OIG-NYPD makes the following new recommendations based on the findings within 
this report: 
 
 
1. Ensure that all uniformed personnel authorized to nominate individuals 
into the CGD receive training about the requirements of the IUP and the 
Chief of Detectives Memorandum. 
 
2. Update the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to require the two 
independent reliable sources to provide substantive explanations for their 
reasonable belief of an individual’s criminal group membership  and to 
document those explanations on activation DD5s. 
 
3. Update the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to clarify that the 
two independent sources should be different from the reporting officer.  
 
4. Update the IUP to mirror the detailed guidelines included within the Chief 
of Detectives Memorandum.  
 
5. Update the IUP  and Chief of Detectives Memorandum  to reflect a 
multilevel review process for renewals and ensure that a supervisor reviews 
and signs off on all renewal DD5s, as previously recommended and accepted 
by the Department, and list the required supporting documentation. 
 
6. Update the IUP to require the nominating detective to notify the juvenile’s 
parent or guardian within 60-days of activation into the CGD.  
 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 45 
 
7. Update the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to ensure that 
renewal and activation DD5s include a required field containing the 
individual’s next review date.  
 
8. Create, and memorialize in writing, an internal audit requirement to 
ensure that notifications to parents of minors added to the database are 
made, that the associated Notification DD5s are completed, and that the 
notification appears within a new column i n the database as required by 
the Chief of Detectives Memorandum.  
 
9. Confirm whether any individual activated at age 16 or 17 has been in the 
database for over two years without a review, due to the coding error 
identified above and review any such individual to determine whether they 
should be renewed into the database or deactivated. 
 
10. Ensure that supporting documentation is included for all renewals.  
 
 
11. Conduct quarterly audits to ensure that there are no past due entries for 
review, and if there are, renew or deactivate them immediately.  
 
12. Review individuals renewed based on an arrest every six months to ensure 
that renewals are not based on arrests that are subsequently sealed. NYPD 
should at minimum explore whether it is feasible to audit renewals for this 
purpose.  
 
13. Collect, analyze, and publish data concerning the number of entries added, 
renewed, and deactivated from the database annually.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 46 
 
 Appendix A: List of Recommendations and NYPD’s Initial Response 
Accepted Recommendations 
Rec. 1 Within 180 days, NYPD should publish a statement on its website describing how the CGD 
contributes to the Department’s public safety and violent crime reduction strategies. 
Rec. 2 Within 180 days, NYPD should revise the IUP for the CGD to describe the activation, 
renewal, and deactivation processes, explain the nature and extent of the evidence required 
to satisfy the entry criteria, and identify by name the law enforcement and other external 
entities with whom NYPD may share information about the individuals included in the CGD, 
for investigative or other purposes. The document should also describe the security 
protections that prevent unauthorized parties, within or outside of NYPD, from accessing 
the CGD. 
Rec. 3 NYPD should require a multilevel review process (memorialized in writing) for the 
activation, renewal, and deactivation of all entries in the CGD, supported by the signature 
of each reviewer where required. 
Rec. 4 NYPD should provide written guidance to officers explaining how to apply the Option A and 
B entry criteria, including examples of the type and extent of evidence that is sufficient for 
activation. 
Rec. 5 NYPD should provide written guidance for officers about how to complete the Person 
Maintenance, Activation, and Renewal DD5s for the maintenance and entry of individuals 
into the CGD, and should include a requirement that available documentation be attache d 
to the DD5s to substantiate that entry criteria are satisfied. 
Rec. 6 NYPD should create a list of police encounters and arrest types that constitute “qualifying 
police contact,” for purposes of renewal determinations, to be used by officers responsible for 
deciding whether to renew or deactivate individuals from the CGD. 
Rec. 11 NYPD should notify parents or guardians of minors that their children have been included 
in the CGD, within 60 days of inclusion, unless notification would interfere with active 
criminal investigations. 
Rec. 13 NYPD should ensure that officers completing Person Maintenance, Activation and Renewal 
forms do not have access to sealed arrest information for that purpose, including, but not 
limited to ensuring that these DD5 forms do not autofill with sealed arrest in formation, 
unless explicitly authorized by law. 
Rec. 14 NYPD should not consider sealed arrests when making CGD activation and renewal 
determinations. 
Rec. 15 NYPD should increase the number of staffers assigned to support the administration of the 
CGD. 
Rec. 17 Annually, as requested, NYPD should provide a random sample (including minors) of all 
Activation, Renewal and Deactivation DD5s and any supporting documentation to OIG -
NYPD for review. 
Recommendation Under Consideration 
Rec. 10 NYPD should require and convene a special review panel of Department personnel to 
approve the activation of minors into the CGD, documented by the signature of the chair of 
the group. 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 47 
 
Rejected Recommendations 
Rec. 7 Within 180 days, NYPD should begin a review of each entry in the CGD to determine 
whether inclusion is still warranted. That analysis should be completed by the Department 
within one year after the publication of this Report. 
Rec. 8 NYPD should require, by written policy, the review of all CGD entries every twelve months 
for minors and every eighteen months for adults. 
Rec. 9 NYPD should make inaccessible via DAS and other search methods all CGD entries that are 
not evaluated within 60 days of review deadlines, until those entries are reviewed 
Rec. 12 NYPD should create a process for minors and their parents to appeal their inclusions in the 
database if the minors have no contact with law enforcement over a twelve-month period. 
Rec. 16 NYPD should create a written policy formalizing its intention, after an individualized 
assessment, to generally grant FOIL requests by individuals with respect to whether they 
are in the CGD, by providing them with redacted versions of any relevant support ing 
documents if they are in the database, and by informing them that there are no relevant 
documents, if they are not. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 48 
 
 Appendix B: Impact and Use Policy – October2023  
 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 49 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 50 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 51 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 52 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 53 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 54 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 55 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 56 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 57 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 58 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 59 
 
 Appendix C: Impact and Use Policy – April 2021  
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 60 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 61 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 62 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 63 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 64 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 65 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 66 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 67 
 
 

Update on Implementation of Criminal Group Database Recommendations  2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 68 
 
 
