more 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
JOCELYN E. STRAUBER 
COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE Release 14-2025 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 26, 2025 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
  
DOI REPORT FINDS NYCHA AND ITS CONTRACTOR FAILED TO PROVIDE REQUIRED OVERSIGHT OF  
SECURITY/FIRE GUARDS ENDANGERING RESIDENTS IN NYC PUBLIC HOUSING   
Jocelyn E. Strauber, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Investigation (“DOI”), issued a 
Report today on an investigation into the oversight of security  guards at New York City Housing Authority 
(“NYCHA”) Senior Buildings, which are dedicated to housing residents aged 62 years and older, and compliance 
with fire guard requirements at Senior Buildings and other NYCHA developments. DOI’s investigation determined 
that NYCHA and the contracted security firm FJC Security, doing business as Allied Universal Security Services 
(“Allied Universal” or “Allied”), failed to consistently provide required and sufficient oversight , endangering 
vulnerable residents and violating contractual obligations. A copy of the Report follows this release and can also 
be found at this link: https://www.nyc.gov/site/doi/newsroom/public-reports.page   
DOI Commissioner Jocelyn E. Strauber said, “DOI’s investigation identified numerous failures in the security 
and fire guard services that NYCHA’s vendor, Allied Universal Security Services , provided at NYCHA 
developments. These failures jeopardized the safety of NYCHA residents, including at NYCHA buildings 
dedicated to seniors. Allied and NYCHA allowed these failures to persist through lack of adequate oversight. DOI 
has made twelve recommendations to NYCHA which will improve its management  and supervision of these 
contracted guards and NYCHA has agreed to implement the majority of those recommendations .”  
DOI’s investigation was prompted by March 2022 media reports on security lapses at NYCHA’s Corsi 
Houses in East Harlem, N.Y., which showed that the front door of the building did not lock, allowing trespassers 
to enter. DOI began an investigation to assess the functionality of the lobby doors at Corsi Houses and to evaluate 
the quality of service provided by the security guards who were employed by Allied Universal. In DOI’s first 
inspection, investigators observed the scheduled security guard was absent and a non- resident trespasser was 
inside the lobby. These discoveries prompted DOI to conduct a broader investigation of the security guards and 
infrastructure at NYCHA’s Senior Buildings from May 2022 through April 2023.  
The investigation, which included 39 in-person inspections of Senior Buildings and a review of CCTV footage 
of 55 security guard shifts, determined that the security guards performing work for NYCHA frequently abandoned 
their posts or failed to show up for work, and falsified their handwritten timesheets to indicate that they had worked 
their entire shift, jeopardizing the safety of NYCHA residents and c ausing NYCHA to be billed for services that 
were not in fact provided. DOI concluded its investigation of the security guards in April 2023 and shared the 
results with NYCHA in June 2023. While NYCHA sought to ensure that guards were present thereafter , and to 
enforce other aspects of its contract with Allied, guards continued to be absent from their posts.   
DOI’s findings regarding security guards included: 
• Based on DOI’s surveillance of randomly selected senior buildings: 
 64 of the 94 scheduled security guards (approximately 68%) were absent for all or part of their 
required shift;  

2 
 
 54 guards abandoned their post for an average of approximately 2 hours; five  were no-shows 
for their entire 8- hour shift; five committed other infractions, such as remaining in an 
unauthorized location away from their required posts, sleeping, or consuming alcohol during 
shifts.  
• Some of the absent guards falsified their handwritten timesheets to incorrectly indicate they worked 
a full shift.  
• During the in- person inspections, DOI found approximately nine of 28 lobby doors  (approximately 
32%) were not secure. DOI also found 44 of the 63 Senior Buildings (approximately 70%) had CCTV 
cameras that were inoperable or unable to be viewed remotely.  
In the spring and summer of 2023, DOI also investigated the fire guard services provided by Allied Universal 
at NYCHA’s 24/7 fire watch locations (“Fire Watch Sites”), buildings where the fire safety features are deficient 
and cannot be corrected within four  hours. In those circumstances, the N.Y.C. Fire Code requires that one fire 
guard per 50,000 square feet of space be present in the building at all times, until the deficient feature is corrected.   
DOI’s investigation found: 
• Based on inspections of 60 Fire Watch Sites from June 9, 2023, to July 10, 2023, only 23 of 60 
scheduled fire guards (approximately 38%) were present at their assigned posts for the duration of 
the inspection (lasting one to two hours) , violating  the terms of Allied Universal’s contract and 
jeopardizing residents’ safety in the event of a fire. DOI began to share its findings with NYCHA in 
June 2023, while its investigation was continuing. The fire guards , however, continued to abandon 
their posts thereafter, as NYCHA documented in letters to Allied Universal seeking to enforce contract 
compliance.  
• Certain fire guards falsified their handwritten timesheets to indicate that they completed their 
scheduled shifts when they had not. 
 
• Scheduled fire guards were absent during three fires that occurred in three different buildings -- in 
the Douglass Houses, Taft Houses, and Ingersoll Houses developments  -- two of which resulted in 
minor injuries. The fire guards had falsified their handwritten timesheets  claiming to be present for 
the entirety of their scheduled shifts when in fact they were not. 
 
• From October 2019 to February 2024, the term of the contract, NYCHA and Allied Universal failed to 
consistently exercise required oversight of the security and fire guards that could hav e prevented or 
mitigated the guards’ absences and other noncompliance. Both the contract and NYCHA’s Standard 
Operating Procedure manual required NYCHA to actively oversee security and fire guards. DOI 
determined that NYCHA’s Office of Safety and Security (“OSS”), which is primarily responsible for 
this oversight, failed, among other things, to consistently conduct field inspections of the security and 
fire guards, and to document the inspections that it did conduct, for multiple consecutive years of the 
contract term.  
DOI concluded that Allied Universal failed to provide  services for which it billed NYCHA , and that both 
NYCHA and Allied  Universal failed to conduct proper oversight of the guards, and thus did not identify and 
promptly address the guards’ absences and other noncompliance, jeopardizing the safety of vulnerable NYCHA 
residents. Because NYCHA has committed to provide security guards at these locations and continues to be 
legally required to provide fire guards wher e necessary, NYCHA must improve its oversight of these guards  to 
ensure that they perform their duties as required. 
DOI issued 12 recommendations to address the vulnerabilities noted in this Report. NYCHA accepted eight 
recommendations and accepted four recommendations in part, including: 
 NYCHA contracts for security and fire guard services should include a requirement that a vendor 
provide a smartphone application for the guards that incorporates geofencing technology and electronic 
timekeeping. The geof encing and electronic timekeeping application should record and send an alert to the 
vendor’s managerial staff when guards leave the boundary of their assigned post during their shift. 
 NYCHA contracts for security and fire guard services should include a d efinition of “post 
abandonment” that specifies the minimum number of minutes that constitutes post abandonment, i.e. an absence 
exceeding 15 minutes. 
3 
 
 NYCHA should provide security guards with a designated security desk or podium on the main floor 
or lobby of the building that bears NYCHA’s insignia and will serve as a central location for the guards. Similarly, 
NYCHA should require property management t o post signage in the lobby that includes the contact information 
for NYCHA’s OSS for emergencies and for inquiries or complaints about security and/or fire guards.  
 NYCHA should require that OSS conduct a minimum number of unannounced inspections each 
month to assess security and fire guard performance, and that those inspections be documented.  
 NYCHA should revise the Security Guard Service Field Inspection Report to require that inspections 
include the lobby and stairwell doors to confirm whether the doors are secure and the self -closing hardware 
functions properly; and to specify that OSS must immediately report to the development’s property management 
any deficiencies related to security infrastructure identified during an inspection. NYCHA should also revise the 
Security Guard Service Field Inspection Report to require a more efficient, electronic method of delivery, such as 
scanning and uploading the completed form. 
 NYCHA should establish a process for receipt and verification of invoices, certified payroll, electronic 
timekeeping, and geofencing records and should ensure that the documents accurately reflect the hours worked 
before issuing payment.  
 NYCHA should require the vendor to provide bi-weekly invoices, so that NYCHA may cross-reference 
the invoices with CCTV footage when NYCHA  deems necessary, and NYCHA should retain the relevant CCTV 
footage until they have reviewed and approved the invoice. 
DOI Commissioner Strauber thanked NYCHA Chief Executive Officer Lisa Bova-Hiatt and her staff for their 
cooperation on this investigation.  
At DOI, the investigation was conducted by Confidential Investigator Wenny Hon, Chief Investigator Ivonne 
Alvarado-DeJesus, and Assistant Counsel Lauren Kropiewnicki  of DOI’s Office of the Inspector General for 
NYCHA; and supervised by Assistant Inspector s General William O’Brien and Nancy Roa, Deputy Inspector 
General Osa Omoigui , Inspector General Ralph Iannuzzi, Deputy Commissioner of Strategic Initiatives 
Christopher Ryan, and Deputy Commissioner/Chief of Investigations Dominick Zarrella.  
 
 
DOI is one of the oldest law-enforcement agencies in the country and New York City’s corruption watchdog. Investigations may 
involve any agency, officer, elected official or employee of the City, as well as those who do business with or receive benefits from 
the City. DOI’s strategy attacks corruption comprehensively through systemic investigations that lead to high-impact arrests, 
preventive internal controls and operational reforms that improve the way the City runs. 
 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
 
  
 
New York City 
Department of Investigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber 
Commissioner 
 
Ralph M. Iannuzzi 
Inspector General for NYCHA 
 
 
March 2025 
 
Safeguarding NYCHA Residents:  
A Review of Select Safety Measures at  
Senior Buildings & Compliance with  
Fire Guard Requirements 
 
Safeguarding NYCHA Report March 2025 
 
 
 
Table of Contents
 
I. Executive Summary.…………………………………………………………………………………………...1  
II. Background.……………………………………………………………………………………………………..5  
A. Security Guards and Senior Buildings.………………………………………………………………..5  
B. Fire Guards and Fire Watch Sites.……………………………………………………………………...7  
C. Oversight Requirements.…………………………………………………………………………………8  
D. NYCHA’s Contract with FJC Security d/b/a Allied Universal.…………………………………….10  
III. Investigative Findings.………………………………………………….…………………………………….10  
A. The Security Guard Investigation.……………………………………………………………………..10  
1. Security Personnel.………………………………………………………………………………….10  
a. First Round of Surveillance.…………………………………………………………………..10  
b. CCTV Footage and Allied Universal Invoice Review.……………………………….. .12 
c. Additional In-Person Surveillance.………………………………………………………13  
d. Security Guard Findings—Conclusions .……………………………………………….13  
2. Security Infrastructure………………………………………………………………………….14  
a. Trespassing and Lobby Doors……………………………………………………………14  
b. Genetec CCTV Accessibility Review…………………………………………………….15  
B. The Fire Guard Investigation………………………………………………………………………..15  
C. Findings Regarding NYCHA and Allied Universal’s Oversight Responsibilities and 
NYCHA’s Remedial Actions…………………………………………………………………………18   
1. NYCHA’s Oversight Responsibilities………………………………………………………...18  
2. Allied Universal’s Oversight Responsibilities………………………………………………25  
3. Oversight Failures—Conclusions …………………………………………………………….27  
D. Recommendations…………………………………………………………………………………...28  
IV. Conclusion………………………………………………………………………………………………………31  
V. Appendix………………………………………………………………………………………………………...32  
  
Safeguarding NYCHA Report March 2025 
 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 1  
 
I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
The New York City Housing Authority (“NYCHA” or “the Authority”) is home 
to 1 in 17 New Yorkers and provides affordable housing to more than 500,000 
residents.1 Residents of NYCHA housing, and City officials, have had longstanding 
concerns about the state of basic safety features including building entry doors, as 
well as the oversight of security and fire guards.2,3,4,5  
In March 2022, media reports stated that the front door at NYCHA’s Corsi 
Houses, a single building dedicated to residents aged 62 and older, did not lock, and 
as a result, trespassers entered the building 6—prompting an investigation by the 
 
1 About NYCHA, N.Y.C. HOUSING AUTHORITY, https://www.nyc.gov/site/nycha/about/about-nycha.page 
(last visited March 24, 2025) (NYCHA has 177,569 apartments in  2,411 buildings  across 335 
conventional public housing and PACT developments, housing 360,970 residents. The remaining 
139,000 residents are Section 8 tenants. Section 8 tenants are not permitted to reside in the 
conventional public housing discussed in this report). 
2 See Oversight - Doors, Locks and Lights: The Infrastructure of Resident Safety at NYCHA: Transcript 
of Joint Hearing Before the Comms. on Public Housing and Aging , 2022-2023 Sess., pg. 4−6 (N.Y.C. 
2023). 
3 See N.Y.C. OFF. OF THE COMPTROLLER, FK23-069S, OBSERVATIONS OF BUILDING DOORS IN NYCHA 
DEVELOPMENTS (2022) (This 2022 audit conducted by New York City Comptroller Brad Lander found 
that 36.8% of building entrance doors at 262 NYCHA developments were propped open or unlocked 
and 40.1% of entrance door locks were broken. Additionally, between the N.Y.C. Comptrol ler’s 2018 
and 2022 audits, the number of entrance doors that were propped open and/or had broken locks 
increased from 23.5% in 2018 to 57.9% in 2022). 
4 See Former Federal Monitor Bart M. Schwartz, Monitor’s Final Quarterly Report for the New York 
City Housing Authority, pg. 18, 60 (Feb. 27, 2024)  
https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/24487647-nychamonitorletterfinal-report-3-19-2024 (last 
visited March 24, 2025) (The former Federal Monitor for NYCHA, Bart M. Schwartz, reviewed Allied 
Universal’s performance as NYCHA’s contracted security and fire guard personnel. The former 
Federal Monitor for NYCHA found that guards often did not show up for work and many were not 
present at their posts inside the buildings. Supervisors from the vendors failed to supervise and 
allowed the guards to sign in and out regardless of whether they were present. The Federal Monitor 
also reported that resident leaders and other residents  at various buildings complained that security 
and fire guard personnel generally provided little meaningful security and often did not perform their 
duties).  
5 See N.Y.C. Department of Investigation, Office of the Inspector General for NYCHA, Fire Safety and 
Prevention in Public Housing (Mar. 30, 2023),  
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2023/12NYCHAfiresafety.Rpt.Release03.30.2023.pdf    
(This DOI report examined fires in three NYCHA developments. DOI found that, among other issues, 
there were deficiencies in a range of fire safety protocols at the three NYCHA developments, including 
with respect to the repair and maintenance of trash chute hopper doors and other relevant fire safety 
elements in the developments, as well as the auditing of fire safety and maintenance records).  
6 Ayana Harry and Sarah Vasile , PIX11, Trespassers Create Chaos at NYCHA Senior Development  
(March 1 6, 2022) , https://pix11.com/news/local-news/manhattan/trespassers-create-chaos-at-nycha-
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 2  
New York City Department of Investigation (“DOI”). DOI commenced this 
investigation to assess the functionality of the lobby doors at the Corsi Houses and to 
evaluate the quality of service provided by the security guards, who were employed 
by FJC Security , doing business as Allied Universal Security Services (“Allied 
Universal” or “Allied”). During its first inspection of the Corsi Houses, on March 29, 
2022, DOI observed that the scheduled security guard was absent and a non-resident 
trespasser was inside the lobby.   
These discoveries prompted a broader investigation of the security guards and 
infrastructure at NYCHA’s Senior Buildings, buildings dedicated to housing senior 
residents, for the period of May 2022 through April 2023. That investigation, which 
included 39 in-person inspections and a review of CCTV footage of 55 security guard 
shifts, determined that the security guards performing work for NYCHA frequently 
abandoned their posts, failed to show up for work, and falsified their handwritten 
timesheets to indicate that they had worked their entire shift, jeopardizing the safety 
of NYCHA residents and causing NYCHA to be billed for services that were not in 
fact provided. DOI concluded its investigation of the security guards in April 2023 
and shared the results with NYCHA in June 2023. The guards continued to be absent 
from their posts regularly thereafter, as documented by NYCHA in its 
correspondence with Allied Universal, which sought to ensure guards were present 
as required by Allied’s contract with NYCHA and to enforce other contract 
requirements. DOI’s findings included:  
Security Guards 
• Based on DOI’s surveillance of 94 individual security guard shifts across 27 
randomly selected Senior Buildings (approximately 43% of NYCHA’s then -
total of 63 Senior Buildings), 64 of the 94 scheduled security guards 
(approximately 68%)  were absent for all or part of their required shift. 54 
guards abandoned their post for an average of approximately 2 hours; 5 were 
no-shows for their entire 8-hour shift; and 5 committed other infractions, such 
as remaining in an unauthorized location awa y from their required posts, 
sleeping, or consuming alcohol during shifts.  
• Some of the absent guards falsified their handwritten timesheets to incorrectly 
indicate they worked a full shift.  
 
 
senior-development/; Alyssa Paolicelli, Spectrum News, Senior NYCHA Residents Say That They Feel 
Unsafe in Their Homes (March 1 6, 2022), https://ny1.com/nyc/all-boroughs/news/2022/03/16/senior-
nycha-residents-say-they-feel-unsafe-in-their-homes. 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 3  
Security Infrastructure 
• During 28 of the 39 in-person security guard shift inspections, conducted from 
March to July 7, 2022, DOI found 9 of 28 lobby doors (approximately 32%) were 
not secure.    
• DOI found that 44 of 63 of the Senior Buildings, approximately 70%, had CCTV 
cameras that were inoperable or unable to be viewed remotely for various 
reasons.
7       
In the spring and summer of 2023, DOI conducted a separate investigation 
examining Allied Universal’s fire guard services at NYCHA’s 24/7 fire watch locations 
(“Fire Watch Sites”), which are buildings where the fire safety features are deficient 
and cannot be corrected with in four hours.8 In those circumstances, the N.Y.C. Fire 
Code requires that one fire guard be present at all times for every 50,000 square feet9 
at a Fire Watch Site. Once the deficient fire safety feature has been repaired, a 
building is no longer characterized as a Fire Watch Site.10 DOI’s investigation found 
that the fire guards also were often absent from their posts, including during active 
fire incidents at three developments, and falsified their handwritten timesheets to 
indicate that they worked their scheduled shifts. In particular, DOI found that: 
Fire Guards  
• Based on visits to a total of 60 Fire Watch Sites from June 9, 2023, to July 10, 
2023, lasting an average of 1 to 2 hours each , only 23 of 60 scheduled fire 
guards, or approximately 38%, were present at their assigned posts for the 
duration of the inspection, in violation of the terms of Allied Universal’s 
contract and jeopardizing residents’ safety in the event of a fire. DOI began to 
share its findings with NYCHA in June 2023, while its investigation was 
continuing. The fire guards continued to abandon their posts thereafter, 
however, as NYCHA documented in letters to Allied Universal.   
• Certain fire guards falsified sign-out times on their handwritten timesheets to 
indicate that they completed their scheduled shifts when they had not.  
 
7 11 of the 44 CCTV cameras were inaccessible to NYCHA and DOI due to being non-Genetec cameras 
(i.e., Bosch 700-9, DM: 2). 12 had connection errors, 14 had no CCTV Cameras listed for the address, 
2 were stand -alone, 1 had damaged fiber optics, 1 had no lis ting, 1 had not yet been turned over to 
NYCHA, 1 had no cameras managed by the development, and 1 is a PACT/RAD-development-managed 
camera, meaning that NYCHA does not have direct access to the camera as it is managed exclusively 
by a private management company.   
8 N.Y.C. Fire Code § 901.7.2.2. 
9 Id., at § 901.7.2.3. 
10 While NYCHA updates its internal Fire Watch Site list on a weekly basis, NYCHA does not wait 
until publishing its weekly list to schedule a fire guard for a particular location, if necessary.  
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 4  
• Scheduled fire guards were absent during three fires that occurred in buildings 
at the Douglass Houses, Taft Houses, and Ingersoll Houses developments, two 
of which resulted in minor injuries. The fire guards had falsified departure 
times on their handwritten timesheets. 
DOI also found that both NYCHA and Allied Universal failed to consistently 
exercise required oversight of the security and fire guards that could have prevented 
or mitigated the guards’ absences and other noncompliance from October 2019 to 
February 2024, the term of the contract. Both the contract and NYCHA’s Standard 
Operating Procedure manual (the “Manual”)
11 required NYCHA to actively oversee 
its security and fire guards.  NYCHA’s Office of Safety and Security (“OSS”) 12 is 
primarily responsible for  this oversight , which includes scheduling shifts for the 
guards, conducting inspections to ensure the guards are in place and working as 
scheduled, and documenting non-compliance.13  
OSS failed to fulfill this responsibility, because it failed to document that it 
had conducted even basic oversight, such as field inspections, for multiple consecutive 
years of the contract term. Senior OSS officials and other NYCHA officials with 
authority over OSS also failed to adequately supervise OSS and to identify or respond 
to these failures.  While OSS eventually began to conduct field inspections and 
document guards’ non-compliance starting in 2022, the lack of documentation in 
earlier years prevented the Authority from becoming aware of the severity of the issue 
earlier in the contract; moreo ver, as NYCHA did not have a suitable alternative 
vendor, NYCHA was unable to terminate the contract more promptly.  
NYCHA also failed to adequately oversee Allied Universal’s completion of 
Allied’s own contractually required oversight duties, including the requirement that 
supervisory staff conduct regular field inspections of guard shifts. NYCHA obtained 
documentation from Allied Universal demonstrating its rate of completion of 
scheduled inspections for only the first 18 months of the contract term, evidently 
failing to acquire any inspection records from Allied Universal for the remaining term 
of the contract. Even for the period of documented inspections, Allied Universal’s rate 
of completion of scheduled inspections was inconsistent, with over 4,000 missed 
inspections noted during the 18-month period. 
DOI therefore concluded that the guards failed to provide the services for 
which NYCHA was billed by Allied, and that both NYCHA and Allied failed to 
 
11 NEW YORK CITY HOUSING AUTHORITY, INDEX NO. 040:99:6, NYCHA STANDARD PROCEDURE MANUAL: 
SECURITY GUARD/FIRE GUARD REQUEST (2017). 
12 OSS has five units: Investigations, Security, CCTV, Administrative, and Resident Watch.  
13 Supra, at note 11.  
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 5  
conduct proper oversight of the guards, and thus did not respond promptly to the 
guards’ absences and other noncompliance.  
The contract with Allied Universal expired in February 2024, and NYCHA 
initially contracted with other companies to provide fire and security guards. 14 The 
additional security guard services were intended to be temporary as NYCHA, at that 
time, lacked funding to provide security services beyond July 1, 2024; after that date, 
NYCHA proposed to rely on the  officers of New York City Police Department and 
Department of Homeless Services to patrol NYCHA developments.
15 However, on 
July 1, 2024 NYCHA announced that it had received funding for security guards at 
Senior Buildings and would continue to provide this crucial service for fiscal year 
2025.
16 Therefore, because NYCHA has committed to provide security guards at these 
locations, and continues to be legally required to provide fire guards where necessary, 
NYCHA must improve its oversight of these guards so that the Authority does not 
repeat the significant failures that DOI identified with respect to Allied Universal’s 
performance under the 2019 to 2024 contract, which endangered vulnerable NYCHA 
residents.   
As a result of these investigations, DOI has issued 12 recommendations to 
NYCHA.  
II. BACKGROUND  
A. Security Guards and Senior Buildings 
NYCHA is not required by law or regulation to provide security guards at its 
developments or offices, but the Authority has chosen to provide them at Senior 
Buildings and some central offices.17 NYCHA’s Office of Safety and Security (“OSS”) 
oversees the guards and is required to create security guards’ work schedules, 
 
14 NYCHA awarded the contract to Wisdom Protective Services (“Wisdom”) in July 2023, ISS Action 
(“ISS”) in October 2023, and Overwatch Services LLC, doing business as City Safe Partners Security 
(“City Safe”), in January 2024. 
15 See Executive Budget Hearings – Public Housing: New York City Council Fiscal Year 2025 Executive 
Budget Hearings: Transcript of Hearing Before the Comm. on Public Housing Jointly with the Comm. 
on Finance, 2024-2025 Sess., pg. 23−25 (N.Y.C. 2024) (NYCHA states that it faces a $35 million-dollar 
deficit for its 2024 operating budget). 
16 Monica Morales, PIX11, Funding Restored for NYCHA Unarmed Security Guard Program (July 1, 
2024),  
https://pix11.com/news/monica-makes-it-happen/funding-restored-for-nycha-unarmed-security-
guard-program/. 
17 For certain NYCHA central offices, NYCHA does not provide security guards and instead the 
landlord provides security services to its tenants. 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 6  
conduct and record regular field inspections, and document instances of non -
compliance, as explained further below.18  
NYCHA’s contract with Allied Universal specified various terms of the security 
guards’ services, including certain requirements pertaining to post coverage. The 
contract obligated Allied Universal to provide uninterrupted security guard coverage, 
and state d that, in the event a guard leaves their post, Allied Universal “must 
immediately cover that Post with a relief Security Guard not already assigned 
elsewhere” and in the event that a relief guard does not show up or is late for their 
scheduled shift, the Security Guard on duty cannot leave his or her Post until 
properly replaced by another Security Guard.
19 The contract also required security 
guards to remain in  uniform;20 make rounds, if assigned; 21 and possess both a New 
York State guard license (“N.Y.S. Security Guard License”) 22 and an N.Y.C. 
Certificate of Fitness for Citywide Fire Guard for Impairment (“N.Y.C. Fire Guard 
Certification”).
23 New York State law also imposes certain requirements on unarmed 
security guards, including 24 hours of initial training and 8 hours of annual training 
(unless exempt) at schools approved by the New York State Division of Criminal 
Justice Services,24 registration with the New York State Department of State, and a 
background investigation.25  
Senior Buildings house thousands of NYCHA’s senior residents. While no law 
or regulation requires NYCHA to provide s ecurity guards, NYCHA has opted to 
provide security guards at these developments to monitor the buildings’ lobbies and 
deter, detect, and report crime due to their uniquely vulnerable residents. T he total 
of number of Senior Buildings in NYCHA’s portfolio fluctuates : NYCHA had 72 
 
18 NEW YORK CITY HOUSING AUTHORITY, INDEX NO. 040:99:6, NYCHA STANDARD PROCEDURE MANUAL: 
SECURITY GUARD/FIRE GUARD REQUEST (2017) (While the Manual allocates these duties to the 
“Security Manager,” there are no employees in OSS or elsewhere in NYCHA that are titled “Security 
Manager,” so it is unclear which employee has this role); see infra  III, C, 1, NYCHA’s Oversight 
Responsibilities.  
19 Id. 
20 NYCHA-Allied Universal Contract, at § 5.5(d).  
21 Id., at § 5.5(f). 
22 Id., at § 3.6(a)(1); see also  NEW YORK CITY HOUSING AUTHORITY, INDEX NO. 040:99:6, NYCHA 
STANDARD PROCEDURE MANUAL: SECURITY GUARD/FIRE GUARD REQUEST, at Appendix XV(A)(3) 
(Security guards must be in possession of a valid N.Y.S. Security Guard License and company photo 
ID at all times, and will present their IDs for inspection upon demand by any NYCHA employee or 
resident). 
23 Id., at §  3.6(a)(2) (“Unless NYCHA grants an exception by a prior written authorization, each 
security guard must…possess a valid N.Y.C. Fire Guard Certification”); see also §  3.5(a)(16) (“the 
duties of security guards at the buildings include, but are not limited to…performing fire guard 
services as needed”). 
24 N.Y.S. Gen. Bus. Law §§ 89-G(1)–(2), 89-H(2). 
25 Id., at § 89-I. 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 7  
Senior Buildings at the start of the contract; 63 at the time of the investigations 
detailed in this report; and 53 as of the release of this report.  As of January 2024, 
NYCHA’s total senior population across all types of developments was 76,477 (24.5% 
of NYCHA’s total conventional public housing population, which does not include 
Section 8 residents), while the total senior population of Senior Buildings was 7,999 
(10.4% of NYCHA’s total senior population).26 
B. Fire Guards and Fire Watch Sites 
 The New York City Fire Code requires occupied buildings with a sprinkler, 
standpipe, or fire alarm system that is out of service and cannot be fixed within four 
hours to have a 24/7 fire watch—i.e., a rotating schedule of fire guards to constantly 
monitor conditions and respond to incidents. 27 NYCHA hires vendors to conduct 
inspections of its fire systems; vendors are required to report failed inspections to the 
location supervisor, NYCHA’s Fire Safety Unit (“FSU”), and FDNY. When a fire 
system fails an inspection, FSU contacts OSS’s Security Manager to request fire 
guard services. A development that requires fire guard coverage must have one guard 
for every 50,000 square feet of floor area.
28 While NYCHA updates its internal Fire 
Watch Site list on a weekly basis, NYCHA schedules fire guards immediately upon 
receiving a report that a fire system has failed an inspection. 
The Fire Code imposes numerous requirements on fire guards. Prospective fire 
guards must pass an examination administered by FDNY (scoring at least 70%) and 
obtain FDNY certification. The exam covers fire guard responsibilities, fire protection 
systems, fire extinguishers, and lithium -ion battery safety . During their shifts, fire 
guards must continuously patrol the area affected by the out-of-service fire protection 
system and must constantly watch for fires; have at least one approved means for 
notifying FDNY and the FDNY -approved fire safety staff on the premises; 
immediately report any fire to FDNY and emergency preparedness staff on the 
premises; and maintain a record of the fire watch during such fire watch and for a 
minimum of 48 hours after the end of the fire watch shift. 29 Fire guards must also 
have access to a portable fire extinguisher, and be trained to use the fire extinguisher, 
as they are responsible for extinguishing fires that are limited in size and spread. 30 
Fire guards are prohibited from having additional responsibilities; for example, a fire 
 
26 Performance Tracking and Analytics Department, NYCHA Resident Data Book 2024 , N.Y.C. 
HOUSING AUTHORITY (January 2024).  
27 N.Y.C. Fire Code § 901.7. 
28 Id., at § 901.7.2.3. 
29 Id., at § 901.7.2.1. 
30 Id. 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 8  
guard could not also serve as a security guard during their fire guard shift.31  NYCHA 
OSS also is responsible for oversight of the fire guards.32,33 
C. Oversight Requirements  
As part of its duty to oversee security and fire guards as outlined in the NYCHA 
Standard Procedure Manual (the “Manual”),34 OSS’s Security Manager35 is required 
to conduct “regular” after- hours field inspections of all general and emergency 
security and fire guards at NYCHA locations, with the purpose of “ensur[ing] proper 
guard performance and contract compliance and confirm general security 
conditions.”36 When conducting the inspections, the Security Manager must complete 
the Security Guard Service Field Inspection Report  form,37 and fax the completed 
form to OSS; the form must be retained for seven years. 38 The form calls for 
information about the time, date, and location of the inspection, as well as 
information about the guard’s performance and post conditions, including whether 
the guard is present at their assigned post; attentive to their duties; in their uniform; 
in possession of their current N.Y.S. Security Guard License, company photo ID, and 
a copy of their Post Orders; whether the visitor sheet and handwritten timesheets are 
properly filled out; and whether a desk, podium, chair and radio/other 
telecommunications device are available at the post. OSS’s Security Manager is also 
required to set guards’ schedules. 
The NYCHA Manual assigns these oversight responsibilities to the “Security 
Manager,” but there are no employees in OSS or elsewhere in NYCHA with the 
official title of “Security Manager,” so it is unclear which employee was initially 
intended to carry out this role. From the initiation of the contract in 2019 until 
September 2022, the responsibility for oversight of the security companies was held 
by a former Deputy Director of OSS, Curtis Cabell; then, from September 2022 to 
August 2023, a former Director,  Latonya Smith, handled this responsibility; and, 
subsequently, from August 2023 to February 2024, the Assistant Director, Constance 
Robotham, assumed this role. 
 
31 Id. 
32 NEW YORK CITY HOUSING AUTHORITY, INDEX NO. 040:99:6, NYCHA STANDARD PROCEDURE MANUAL: 
SECURITY GUARD/FIRE GUARD REQUEST (2017).  
33 Id. (While the Manual allocates these duties to the “Security Manager,” there are no employees in 
OSS or elsewhere in NYCHA that are titled “Security Manager,” so it is unclear which employee has 
this role); see infra III, C, 1, NYCHA’s Oversight Responsibilities.  
34 Id. 
35 Id.  
36 Id.  
37 See Exhibit, NYCHA Security Guard Service Field Inspection Report Form.   
38 NEW YORK CITY HOUSING AUTHORITY, INDEX NO. 040:99:6, NYCHA STANDARD PROCEDURE MANUAL: 
SECURITY GUARD/FIRE GUARD REQUEST (2017). 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 9  
The contract further provided that if NYCHA identified an infraction of the 
contract’s requirements and intended to request liquidated damages from Allied 
Universal, NYCHA must provide written notification to the vendor within four 
business days of the infraction, including the time, location, and description of the 
infraction (“liquidated damages memoranda”).39 After the vendor sent an invoice for 
services provided, the Security Manager was required by the Manual to reconcile all 
invoice amounts, less any deduction from payment to Allied Universal based on the 
guards’ non-compliance and NYCHA’s right to liquidated damages for guards’ missed 
hours or other violations of the contract. Liquidated damages were authorized for 
certain infractions, among others, as follows:  
• failure to appear ($100),
40  
• being out of uniform ($100),41  
• abandoning post ($300),42  
• missed shift inspection ($65),43  
• failure to notify when leaving post ($25),44 and  
• failure to make assigned rounds ($50).45  
OSS is supervised by a Director , with the support of a Deputy Director and 
Assistant Director. NYCHA’s Office of the Vice President for Public Safety oversees 
OSS. NYCHA’s Vice President for Public Safety—a role held by Gerald Nelson from 
October 2019 to July 2021 (as relevant to this r eport) and by James Secreto from 
October 2021 to the present—was required to report to executives of NYCHA’s Office 
of the Chief Operating Officer (specifically, the General Manager/Chief Operating 
Officer, Vito Mustaciuolo, from October 2019 to February 2 022; the Interim Chief 
Operating Officer, Daniel Sherrod, from February 2022 to July 2022; and the Deputy 
Chief Operating Officer, Marvin Walton, from July 2022 to May 2023). Since May 
2023, Vice President for Public Safety James Secreto has reported to th e newly 
created Office of the Senior Vice President of Quality Assurance, Safety, and 
Technical Programs, Lauren Gray.  
 
 
39 NYCHA-Allied Universal Contract, §5.5(a).  
40 Id., at § 5.5(c). 
41 Id., at § 5.5(d).  
42 Id., at § 5.5(b).  
43 Id., at § 5.5(e). 
44 Id., at § 5.5(g)(8).  
45 Id., at § 5.5(f).  
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 10  
D. NYCHA’s Contract with FJC Security d/b/a Allied Universal  
FJC Security has been a vendor for NYCHA’s security and fire guard services 
since 2000 and 2006, respectively. In October 2016, Allied Universal purchased FJC 
Security. As of mid-2023, Allied Universal was North America’s largest security firm, 
the third largest private employer in North America, and the seventh largest private 
employer world-wide.46 NYCHA contracted with Allied Universal for both security 
and fire guard services in late 2019. At the commencement of the contract, Allied 
Universal agreed to supply security guard services at 72 Senior Buildings 47 and 5 
central offices and fire guard services on an as-needed basis. The original contract for 
$75,348,000, effective October 1, 2019, provided for a three -year term with two one -
year renewal options. Of the total amount, $26,208,000 was allocated to Seni or 
Building security and $49,140,000 to fire guard services. NYCHA renewed the 
contract twice, extending it to February 2024 and increasing the total amount to 
$155,060,020. For the 2019 through 2024 contract with Allied Universal, NYCHA has 
paid Allied Universal $142,060,405.70.  
III. INVESTIGATIVE FINDINGS  
During the security and fire guard investigations, DOI discovered a pattern of 
non-compliance by Allied Universal and failures of oversight by NYCHA officials, 
including NYCHA’s OSS and the NYCHA officials who oversaw the office during the 
2019-2022 period  referenced in this investigation. The findings of these 
investigations, including the results of in-person surveillance, CCTV footage, invoice 
review, building inspections, and interviews, are as follows.  
A. The Security Guard Investigation 
1.  Security Personnel 
a. First Round of Surveillance 
In March 2022, media reports stated that individuals were trespassing inside 
NYCHA’s Corsi Houses (a senior-only building) because the lobby door did not lock.48 
That report prompted DOI to inspect the Corsi Houses’ lobby door, confirm the 
 
46 Alana Semuels, TIME, The Problems Inside North America’s Largest Security Firm —and Third -
Biggest Employer (May 11, 2023), https://time.com/6278534/allied-universal-security-problems/. 
47 At the time of the investigations detailed in this report, NYCHA had 63 Senior Buildings. At the 
time of the release of this report, NYCHA has 53.  
48 Ayana Harry and Sarah Vasile , PIX11, Trespassers Create Chaos at NYCHA Senior Development  
(March 1 6, 2022) , https://pix11.com/news/local-news/manhattan/trespassers-create-chaos-at-nycha-
senior-development/; Alyssa Paolicelli, Spectrum News NY1, Senior NYCHA Residents Say That They 
Feel Unsafe in Their Homes (March 16, 2022),  
https://ny1.com/nyc/all-boroughs/news/2022/03/16/senior-nycha-residents-say-they-feel-unsafe-in-
their-homes.  
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 11  
presence of the scheduled security guard, and assess whether there were any 
trespassers in the lobby on five dates in 2022 (March 29, May 10, May 19, May 23, 
and June 7). During the first inspection on March 29, DOI found that the scheduled 
security guard was absent, a non-resident was trespassing inside the lobby, and there 
were human feces, urine, and hypodermic needles in the common areas.  While the 
lobby door was secure, the Director of Corsi Houses’ senior center informed DOI that 
the door was previou sly broken and had been repaired.  DOI notified development 
staff of its findings during the initial inspection, and development management 
created work orders when necessary. NYCHA then informed DOI that NYCHA fixed 
the problems that DOI observed, and DOI confirmed the presence of the security 
guard, absence of trespassers, and the functionality of the lobby door in its four 
subsequent visits on May 10, May 19, May 23, and June 7.  
After visiting the Corsi Houses, DOI initiated a broader investigation of 
security guard performance at 34 randomly selected Senior Buildings, conducting two 
rounds of inspections between May 3 and July 7, 2022. During the first round of 
inspections, conducted from May 3 to June 7, 2022, DOI visited 5 developments to 
verify if the security logbook was present
49,50 and visited 19 NYCHA Senior Buildings 
within those developments to determine if the scheduled guards (one guard assigned 
to each building per shift) (1) were present, (2) possessed their N.Y.S. Security Guard 
License51 and N.Y.C. Fire Guard Certification,52 and (3) were in uniform.53 DOI found 
that 5 of 5 developments, 100%, had the security logbook. However, during DOI’s on-
 
49 NYCHA-Allied Universal Contract, at § 3.5(a)11 (requiring that the security guards keep an 
accurate account through logbook entries of all activity at the Building); see also  NEW YORK CITY 
HOUSING AUTHORITY, INDEX NO. 040:99:6, NYCHA STANDARD PROCEDURE MANUAL: SECURITY 
GUARD/FIRE GUARD REQUEST, at Appendix XV(A)(10) (mandating that security guards maintain a log 
of all activity while on post).   
50 DOI observed during these visits that the security logbook was present at 14 of the 19 developments, 
but did not assess whether the entries in the logbook were accurate or identify who made the entries.    
51 NYCHA-Allied Universal Contract, at § 3.6(a)(1) (Unless NYCHA grants an exception by a prior 
written authorization, each security guard must be licensed as a security guard by the State of New 
York”); see also  NEW YORK CITY HOUSING AUTHORITY, INDEX NO. 040:99:6, NYCHA STANDARD 
PROCEDURE MANUAL: SECURITY GUARD/FIRE GUARD REQUEST, at Appendix XV(A)(3) (Security guards 
must be in possession of a valid N.Y.S. Security Guard License and company photo ID at all times, 
and will present their IDs for inspection upon demand by any NYCHA employee or resident ).  
52 NYCHA-Allied Universal Contract, at 3.6(a)(2) (“Unless NYCHA grants an exception by a prior 
written authorization, each security guard must…possess a valid N.Y.C. Fire Guard Certification ”); 
see also 3.5(a)(16) (“the duties of security guards at the buildings include, but are not limited 
to…performing fire guard services as needed”).  
53 Id., at § 3.5(a)(2) (requiring that the security guard report to their assigned Building on time and in 
complete uniform); see also § 3.9(a) (“the Consultant must provide the security guards with uniforms 
consisting of slacks, a blazer [which may include the Consultant’s insignia or logo], a dress shirt, a tie, 
and as the weather dictates, a coat and hat [which may include the Consultant’s insignia or logo] [the 
‘Uniforms’]…NYCHA requires the security guards to wear the Uniforms while performing the Services 
at the Buildings”). 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 12  
site visit, which lasted for approximately one to two hours, DOI found that only 5 of 
19 security guards, or approximately 26%, were present. Of the 5 security guards who 
were present, all 5 possessed a N.Y.S. Security Guard License, 4 had a N.Y.C. Fire 
Guard Certification, and 4 were in uniform.  
After NYCHA’s OSS provided DOI with a list of security guards’ scheduled 
hours, DOI conducted follow -up visits from June 28 to July 7, 2022, at 15 of these 
Senior Buildings to verify if Allied Universal security personnel (1) were present, (2) 
possessed a N.Y.S. Security Guard License and a N.Y.C. Fire Guard Certification, 
and (3) were in uniform. During DOI’s on-site visit, which lasted approximately one 
to two hours, DOI found that only 9 of 15 security guards, approximately 60%, were 
present. Of the 9 security guards who were present, all 9 possessed a N.Y.S. Security 
Guard License and 8 were in uniform, but only 4 of 9,
54 approximately 44%, possessed 
a N.Y.C. Fire Guard Certification. 
Based on these findings, DOI determined that reviewing NYCHA Senior 
Buildings’ Genetec CCTV footage would be necessary to verify whether there was an 
Allied Universal security guard constantly stationed at each Senior Building for their 
full shift as requi red by the contract.  DOI also inspected the accessibility of the 
Genetec CCTV cameras, discussed below.55 
b. CCTV Footage and Allied Universal Invoice Review  
DOI reviewed 19 Senior Buildings’ CCTV footage 56 over a 2 -to-5-day period 
each, for a total of 55 8-hour shifts from August 5, 2022, to March 6, 2023, to confirm 
whether security personnel were present throughout their scheduled hours. DOI 
documented the security guards’ arrivals and departures with screenshots, and, as 
applicable, documented certain contractual infractions —i.e., being out of uniform 
($100),
57 not showing up to a scheduled shift ($100), 58 and abandoning post (which 
DOI defined as being absent from a post, without informing Allied Universal’s 
Command Center and ensuring the deployment of a replacement guard, for more 
than 10 minutes) ($300).59  
DOI found that 45 of 55 security guards, approximately 82%, worked less than 
their contracted shifts, totaling 45 infractions, including 40 infractions for 
abandoning post (for an average duration of approximately two hours) and 5 
 
54 DOI did not ask one of the 9 present security guards whether they possessed a N.Y.C. Fire Guard 
Certification.  
55 See infra III, 2, b, Genetec CCTV Accessibility Review.  
56 See Exhibit, DOI CCTV Senior Buildings Security Guard Footage Review by Development.  
57 NYCHA-Allied Universal Contract, at § 5.5(d).  
58 Id., at § 5.5(c). 
59 Id., at § 5.5(b).  
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 13  
infractions for failure to appear. DOI calculated that these infractions would amount 
to $12,750.00 in liquidated damages60 for August 5, 2022, to March 6, 2023. Moreover, 
when DOI attempted to cross-reference the CCTV footage with the submitted Allied 
Universal invoices and accompanying handwritten timesheets, DOI discovered 
discrepancies between the actual number of hours th at the security guards worked 
(as captured on the CCTV footage) and the number of hours the guards indicated they 
had worked on their handwritten timesheets, revealing that guards were falsifying 
their handwritten timesheets prior to the end of their shift  to conceal the fact that 
they had abandoned their shift. 
c. Additional In-Person Surveillance 
Based on the CCTV findings, DOI selected three NYCHA consolidations, five 
buildings in total, that appeared to have reoccurring contract infractions (i.e., Leavitt 
Houses, UPACA #5 and 6, and Borinquen Plaza I and II Houses) and conducted 
additional survei llance. At all five buildings, DOI discovered that the scheduled 
security guards failed to comply with crucial contract requirements. Specifically, DOI 
observed the following:   
• 2 of 5 security guards were found asleep at their posts;  
• 1 of 5 security guards arrived to their post approximately 43 minutes late, left 
their post 17 minutes after arriving (only an hour into their scheduled shift), 
and purchased and drank alcohol
61 at a nearby corner store before returning 
to their shift;  
• 2 of 5 security guards, while present at their developments, entered and 
remained in unpermitted locations away from their required posts in the lobby.  
These incidents reflect a pattern of non -compliance by Allied Universal’s security 
guards and a failure to provide security to NYCHA’s senior buildings pursuant to the 
terms of the contract. 
d. Security Guard Findings—Conclusions  
In sum, DOI’s in-person inspections and CCTV footage review of 94 individual 
security guard shifts across 27 randomly selected Senior Buildings revealed that 66 
of the 94 scheduled security guards (approximately 68%)  were absent for all or part 
of their required shift or committed other violations of the contract, including 40 that 
 
60 This calculation was made by DOI and is independent of the liquidated damages that were 
calculated or recuperated by NYCHA.  
61 NYCHA-Allied Universal Contract, at § 3.6(b)(1)(b); see also  NEW YORK CITY HOUSING AUTHORITY, 
INDEX NO. 040:99:6, NYCHA STANDARD PROCEDURE MANUAL: SECURITY GUARD/FIRE GUARD REQUEST, 
Appendix XV(A)(25) (2017). 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 14  
abandoned their post, 14 that were absent from their post, 5 that failed to appear for 
their shift, and 5 that committed other infractions such as remaining in an 
unauthorized location in the building away from their required posts, sleeping, or 
consuming alcohol during shifts. DOI also found that guards who abandoned their 
posts falsified their handwritten timesheets by writing, in advance of the shift’s end, 
that they signed out at the end of their shift, even though DOI observed that they 
had abandoned their posts prior to the end of their shifts. This indicates that these 
guards planned ahead to abandon their posts, thereby leaving the lobbies of these 
Senior Buildings unprotected and in greater danger of trespassing and other crimes, 
and attempted to conceal their infractions by falsifying handwritten timesheets. DOI 
completed its investigation of the security guards working at Senior Buildings and 
shared the findings of the investigation with NYCHA in June 2023, in response to a 
request from NYCHA’s Vic e President of Procurement Ethics and Vendor 
Responsibility for information pertaining to any deficiencies that DOI had observed 
with respect to the performance of Allied Universal’s security guards.  
2.    Security Infrastructure  
a. Trespassing and Lobby Doors 
 It is NYCHA’s responsibility to maintain the security infrastructure within its 
developments; that infrastructure is critical to ensuring residents’ safety.  As 
explained above, after the Ma rch 2022 media reports stated that the front door at 
NYCHA’s Corsi Houses (a single Senior Building) did not lock, and as a result, 
individuals were trespassing and using drugs inside the building,
62 DOI inspected 
the Corsi Houses on five dates: March 29, May 10, May 19, May 23, and June 7, 2022. 
During each of the five visits, DOI found that the lobby door was functional and 
secure. However, the Corsi Houses Property Manager reported that the lobby door 
had been broken and was only recently fixed. Notwithstanding the secure lobby door, 
during its first visit to the Corsi Houses, DOI observed an unauthorized individual 
inside the lobby, observed human feces, urine, and hypodermic needles in the common 
areas (i.e., stairwells, roof, and basement), a nd heard from tenants that they had 
observed non-resident trespassers in the lobby and stairwells during the evenings . 
After DOI notified the development staff of these conditions, they were remedied and 
not present during DOI’s four follow up visits to the Corsi Houses.  
 
62 Ayana Harry and Sarah Vasile , PIX11, Trespassers Create Chaos at NYCHA Senior Development  
(March 1 6, 2022) , https://pix11.com/news/local-news/manhattan/trespassers-create-chaos-at-nycha-
senior-development/; Alyssa Paolicelli, Spectrum News NY1, Senior NYCHA Residents Say That They 
Feel Unsafe in Their Homes (March 16, 2022),  
https://ny1.com/nyc/all-boroughs/news/2022/03/16/senior-nycha-residents-say-they-feel-unsafe-in-
their-homes.  
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 15  
Subsequently, from May 3 to June 7, 2022, DOI inspected 15 Senior Buildings’ 
lobby doors to assess whether they were operational and to identify any potential 
trespassers in the lobbies. DOI did not observe any unauthorized persons, but DOI 
found that only  11 of 15, or approximately 73%, of the lobby doors inspected were 
secure. DOI conducted additional inspections of lobby doors and looked for potential 
trespassers from June 28 to July 7, 2022, at 13 Senior Buildings, and did not discover 
any persons who appeared to be trespassers. DOI also found that only 8 of 13 lobby 
doors inspected,
63 or approximately 61%, were secure. In total, from both inspections, 
DOI found that 19 of 28 lobby doors inspected, or approximately 68%, were secure, 
and 32% were not secure. The combination of non -secure lobby doors and frequently 
absent security guards raises significant security concerns for the elderly residents 
of these buildings.   
b. Genetec CCTV Accessibility Review 
Security cameras are critical features of a building’s security system; the 
presence of a camera is a deterrent to criminal activity and cameras can capture 
evidence of criminal activity that may occur. To verify whether the cameras at Senior 
Buildings were functioning and accessible, DOI attempted to access the Genetec 
CCTV cameras at the 63 Senior Buildi ngs. DOI found that 44 of 63 of the Senior 
Buildings, approximately 70%, had CCTV cameras that could not be viewed remotely 
for various reasons, including outdated or incompatible software or hardware causing 
login, connection, and data storage issues; cam era models lacking remote viewing 
capabilities; and damage.
64 NYCHA retains footage for varying lengths of time , 
depending on the camera model. 
B.  The Fire Guard Investigation  
On March 30, 2023, DOI commenced the fire guard investigation after 
receiving an anonymous complaint regarding fires that occurred at two of NYCHA’s 
Senior Buildings in early 2023; DOI also examined a third fire, which occurred in 
mid-2023 at another Fire Watch Site. In this investigation, DOI reviewed the general 
performance of Allied Universal’s fire guards in both Senior Buildings and NYCHA’s 
other developments.   
 
63 DOI investigators did not check the lobby doors for two buildings.  
64 11 of the 44 CCTV cameras were inaccessible due to being non -Genetec cameras (i.e., Bosch 700 -9, 
DM: 2), 12 had connection errors, 14 had no CCTV Cameras listed for the address, 2 were stand-alone, 
1 had damaged fiber optics, 1 had no listing, 1 had not y et been turned over to NYCHA, 1 had no 
cameras managed by the development, and 1 is a PACT/RAD-development-managed camera, meaning 
NYCHA does not have direct access to the camera as it is managed exclusively by a private 
management company. 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 16  
The first incident that prompted the fire guard investigation occurred at 1:15 
a.m. in the morning of February 28, 2023, at a building in the Ingersoll Houses 
development, located at 25 Monument Walk, Brooklyn, N.Y., when a lithium -ion 
battery exploded while charging. This site was designated as a Fire Watch Site, but 
a review of CCTV footage showed that there was no fire guard present from 1:00 a.m. 
to 3:30 a.m. Two persons were transported to the hospital for minor injuries. If the 
fire guard had been pre sent as required, the fire guard would have been on duty to 
report the fire to FDNY, document the fire throughout its duration, and, if possible 
and consistent with their training, extinguish the fire with the available portable fire 
extinguisher. 
Subsequently, on March 15, 2023, at 3:45 p.m., a fire occurred in an apartment 
kitchen at the Douglass Houses, located at 850 Columbus Avenue, New York, N.Y., 
in a building that was designated as a Fire Watch Site. A fire guard was scheduled 
for an 8:00 a. m. to 4:00 p.m. shift that day; however, the fire guard arrived at 8:09 
a.m. and departed at 8:14 a.m. The guard was absent for nearly three hours and 
returned at 11:05 a.m. but could not enter the building (for reasons unknown) and 
departed again. The guard did not return for the remainder of the shift. CCTV footage 
also revealed that, as a result of the fire, a resident fled the building with an infant, 
and the lobby could be seen filled with thick smoke until approximately 20 to 30 
minutes later, when FD NY had completed extinguishing the fire and informed 
residents that they could return to the building. There were no reported injuries. 
However, as with the above incident, the fire guard’s absence increased the risk of 
harm to residents, as fire guards are trained and required to ensure prompt 
notification of FDNY, documentation of the fire, and extinguishing of small fires.  
After reviewing CCTV footage of the incidents, NYCHA sent Allied Universal 
a memorandum, dated March 16, 2023, requiring that Allied Universal submit a 
staffing accountability action plan due to the insufficient fire guard coverage. NYCHA 
also sent Allied Universal a liquidated damages memorandum, dated March 17, 2023, 
informing Allied Universal that NYCHA would be entitled to liquidated damages due 
to Allied Universal’s lack of coverage during the time in which the fires occurred. 
Allied Universal subseque ntly accepted NYCHA’s calculation of the liquidated 
damages owed, terminated the employees that were scheduled to be on duty at the 
buildings at that date and time, and submitted a staffing accountability plan.
65  
A third fire (cause unknown) occurred at approximately 2:19 a.m.  on May 14, 
2023, in an apartment at the Taft Houses, located at 70 East 115th Street, New York, 
N.Y., in a building listed as a Fire Watch Site. The fire guard who was scheduled for 
 
65 See Exhibit, Allied Universal Staffing Accountability Action Plan.   
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 17  
the 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m. shift abandoned their post two hours early, and there was 
no coverage for the 12:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. shift, the period when the fire occurred. 
Two people were transported to the hospital for minor smoke inhalation. In response, 
NYCHA sent a liquidated damages memorandum to Allied Universal and sought 
damages for the absence of the fire guard during the Taft Houses fire, as verified by 
CCTV footage review, on May 15, 2023. 
For all three incidents, NYCHA’s failure to have fire guards on site at all times 
violated the N.Y.C. Fire Code, which mandates the constant presence of fire guards 
to compensate for the absence of effective fire protection systems (such as sprinklers, 
standpipes and fire alarms) at Fire Watch Sites. At these sites, the absence of a 
trained fire watch professional, who is available to swiftly address and extinguish 
fires, increased the risk to residents that fires would spread and cause damage or 
injury.   
Thereafter, DOI began inspecting other fire guard posts to verify the presence 
of the guards and compliance with other N.Y.C. Fire Code requirements. Based on a 
list of active Fire Watch Sites that DOI obtained from NYCHA’s OSS in March 2023, 
and a revised list received in June 2023,
66 DOI selected a random sample of 32 
NYCHA developments located throughout the five boroughs and performed 
unannounced site visits, lasting approximately one to two hours each, at 60 buildings 
from June 9 to July 10, 2023, to verify if the fire guard logbooks were present, if 
guards had recorded the correct sign-in and sign-out times, and if the guards (1) were 
present, (2) in uniform, and (3) carrying their N.Y.C. Fire Guard Certification and 
N.Y.S. Security Guard License.  In total, DOI checked for the presence of 60 scheduled 
fire guards (i.e., one per building). DOI found that only 23 of 60 fire guards, or 
approximately 38%, were present at their assigned locations during DOI’s site visits, 
in proper uniform, and carrying their N.Y.C. Fire Guard Certifica tion and N.Y.S. 
Security Guard License; the other 37 fire guards (62%) were absent during DOI’s 
approximately one -to-two-hour-long inspections. DOI also found that the absent 
guards had falsified their handwritten timesheets to indicate that they were present 
for the period of time in which DOI observed that they were absent. The fire guards’ 
absences are concerning. Not only are the absences in violation of law and the Allied 
Universal contract with NYCHA, but also, more importantly, the absence of fire 
guards at buildings where the fire systems have broken or malfunctioned pose safety 
risks to residents of those buildings.  
 
 
66 NYCHA updates its fire guard coverage list weekly.  
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 18  
C.  Findings Regarding NYCHA and Allied Universal’s Oversight Responsibilities and 
NYCHA’s Remedial Actions  
1. NYCHA’s Oversight Responsibilities 
NYCHA’s contract with Allied Universal, which began in October 2019 and 
ended in February 2024, and NYCHA’s Manual, 67 required NYCHA and Allied 
Universal to conduct certain oversight measures to ensure that Allied Universal’s 
security and fire guards complied with the contract. However, during the course of 
the contract, both Allied Universal and NYCHA failed to consiste ntly implement 
these required measures for substantial periods of time , allowing the security and 
fire guards’ pattern of frequent infractions to continue unchecked, and thereby 
endangering residents of both NYCHA’s Senior Buildings and Fire Watch Sites.  
 DOI found that the Security Unit of NYCHA’s OSS 68—the office generally 
responsible for overseeing safety and security matters for the Authority —failed, for 
multiple consecutive years, to document that it had conducted required field 
inspections, recorded and notified Allied Universal of guards’ infractions of the 
contract, calculated liquidated damages using the proper evidence, or requested 
liquidated damages from Allied Universal in the required format.  
With respect to field inspections, the former Director of OSS, Raymond 
Rodriguez, stated that from October 2019 through August 2021, nearly the first two 
years of the contract term, OSS conducted approximately 40 to 60 field inspections 
per month.
69 However, despite being required to document information about 
inspections using the required Security Guard Service Field Inspection Report form70 
and retain that form for at least seven years, OSS has failed to provide any 
documentation to prove that the former Deputy Director and Security Manager, 
Curtis Cabell, or other OSS staff, in fact conducted any field inspections until 
September 2021, as reflected in the chart below.
71  
While OSS conducted and documented inspections for October and November 
2021, OSS failed to document inspections for December 2021. Thereafter, inspections 
were conducted and recorded on a monthly basis, but, from September 2021 through 
October 2022, the monthly totals were inconsistent and much lower than the monthly 
average for the subsequent months through the end of the contract (November 2022 
 
67 NEW YORK CITY HOUSING AUTHORITY, INDEX NO. 040:99:6, NYCHA STANDARD PROCEDURE MANUAL: 
SECURITY GUARD/FIRE GUARD REQUEST (2017). 
68 OSS has five units: Investigations, Security, CCTV, Administrative, and Resident Watch.  
69 DOI interviewed Rodriguez on December 6, 2024. 
70 See Exhibit, NYCHA Security Guard Service Field Inspection Report Form.   
71 DOI interviewed Cabell on April 13, 2023, and requested documentation of the inspections on 
December 18, 2024.  
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 19  
to February 2024). On average, from September 2021 through October 2022, OSS 
conducted and documented approximately 66 monthly inspections, while from 
November 2022 to February 2024, OSS conducted and documented approximately 
167 monthly inspections. Moreover, even assuming OSS did conduct 40 to 60 
inspections per month from October 2019 through August 2021 as stated by the 
former Director, this monthly average is lower than the average number of 
inspections conducted monthly for the periods September 2021 through October 2022 
and November 2022 through February 2024. It is also notable that the more frequent 
inspections that began in November 2022 commenced after former Deputy Director 
Cabell (who had held the Security Manager role since October 2019) was reassigned 
from Security Manager duties in October 2022 and a former OSS Director, Latonya 
Smith, assumed the role of Security Manager.   
Overall, NYCHA completed 3,567 inspections during the term of the contract 
(see table below).  
             OSS Security Guard and Fire Guard Field Inspections for Allied Universal Sites
72 
 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
January N/A 0 0 59 138 109 
February N/A 0 0 31 165 194 
March N/A 0 0 53 188 N/A 
April N/A 0 0 36 141 N/A 
May N/A 0 0 45 221 N/A 
June N/A 0 0 44 162 N/A 
July N/A 0 0 84 192 N/A 
August N/A 0 0 215 181 N/A 
September N/A 0 167 62 174 N/A 
October 0 0 22 63 172 N/A 
November 0 0 42 156 156 N/A 
December 0 0 0 182 152 N/A 
 
 
72 OSS provided DOI with this chart on June 18, 2024. 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 20  
As stated above, the contract also required NYCHA to notify Allied Universal 
of infractions —such as absent security or fire guards —and request liquidated 
damages by sending, within four business days of the infraction, 73 a liquidated 
damages memorandum with the time, location, and description of the infraction. The 
Authority, however, also failed to comply with this requirement, failing to send any 
liquidated damages memoranda until October 2022, nearly a year after OSS began 
documenting field inspections. 
From October 2022 to February 2024, when NYCHA calculated liquidated 
damages, NYCHA cited 3,632 infractions: e.g., failure to appear ($100),74 being out of 
uniform ($100),75 abandoning post ($300),76 missed shift inspection ($65),77 failure to 
notify when leaving post ($25), 78 and failure to make assigned rounds ($50). 79 The 
most common infraction was no show, which accounted for 3,192 infractions —
approximately 88% of all cited infractions. While NYCHA’s failure to conduct and 
document a sufficient number of inspections from 2019 through late 2022 makes it 
difficult to determine with certainty Allied Universal’s compliance with the contract 
during that period, the number of infractions in the following two years strongly 
suggests that Allied Universal’s pattern of non-compliance began in the 2019 through 
late 2022 period and was left largely undetected due to NYCHA’s oversight failures. 
Based on its inspections, NYCHA also calculated a total of $556,015 of 
liquidated damages (see chart below) for October 2022 to February 2024. However, 
to date, NYCHA has only received $88,700 in liquidated damages (i.e., from the total 
for October 2022 to June 2023), approximately 16%, while approximately $467,000 of 
liquidated damages remain outstanding.  As of October 2024, Allied Universal has 
agreed to pay these outstanding damages but has not yet done so. In addition to these 
liquidated damages, and th e $12,750.00 in liquidated damages that DOI calculated 
for guard infractions for the period from August 5, 2022, to March 6, 2023,
80 DOI also 
calculated that NYCHA was entitled to approximately $290,550 in liquidated 
damages for documented instances of Allied Universal’s missed field inspections from 
October 2019 through March 2021. 81 While NYCHA had originally calculated some 
liquidated damages for these missed inspections by Allied Universal during this time 
 
73  NYCHA-Allied Universal Contract, at § 5.5(a).  
74 Id., at § 5.5(c). 
75 Id., at § 5.5(d).  
76 Id., at § 5.5(b).  
77 Id., at § 5.5(e). 
78 Id., at § 5.5(g)(8).  
79 Id., at § 5.5(f).  
80 This calculation was made by DOI and is independent of the liquidated damages that were 
calculated or recuperated by NYCHA.  
81 Cabell provided DOI with these records on December 18, 2024.    
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 21  
period, NYCHA’s calculations had numerous errors and discrepancies, and it is 
unclear whether NYCHA ever sought payment of the liquidated damages amounts it 
calculated.  
NYCHA’s Liquidated Damages Calculations
82 
 
 
 
While NYCHA began consistently conducting inspections and sending 
liquidated damages memoranda from October 2022 until the last full month of the 
contract in February 2024, NYCHA often sent the memoranda months after NYCHA 
 
82 OSS provided DOI with these calculations on April 16, 2024. 
Month Year Liquidated 
Damages 
October 2022 $9,450.00 
November 2022 $9,750.00 
December 2022 $14,550.00 
January 2023 $9,600.00 
February 2023 $11,900.00 
March 2023 $8,700.00 
April 2023 $6,350.00 
May 2023 $10,900.00 
June 2023 $7,500.00 
July 2023 $7,350.00 
August 2023 $6,900.00 
September 2023 $7,200.00 
October 2023 $9,700.00 
November 2023 $10,350.00 
December 2023 $12,850.00 
January 2024 $175,145.00 
February 2024 $237,820.00 
Total  $556,015.00 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 22  
became aware of the infraction —long after the contractually required period ( i.e., 
within 4 days of the infraction). These delayed notifications not only postponed 
NYCHA’s receipt of compensation to which it was entitled, but also Allied Universal’s 
ability to take corrective action such as training, disciplining, or terminating the 
security and fire guards with performance issues.   
DOI also found other OSS failures that caused NYCHA to overpay for Allied 
Universal’s services, including OSS’s failure to consistently implement its required 
procedure for verifying the accuracy of Allied Universal’s invoices. Before submitting 
Allied Universal’s invoices to OSS’s Director to approve payment, OSS’s former 
Deputy Director and Security Manager Cabell, who was responsible for verifying the 
accuracy of Allied Universal’s invoices until approximately October 2021, did not 
consistently review in voices for correct service dates, locations, and account 
information; verify employee hours and pay rate and compare them to Allied 
Universal’s sign-in sheets and payroll report; and make the appropriate deductions 
from invoices. These failures continued u ntil December 2023, although an OSS 
Clerical Associate took over these responsibilities in October 2021, and Assistant 
Director Robotham and former Director Smith took them over from the Clerical 
Associate in April 2023.
83 As a result, among other issues, NYCHA overpaid Allied 
Universal by paying for services that had not been performed.   
NYCHA also likely undercounted the total liquidated damages owed to the 
Authority. As explained above, NYCHA first failed to consistently conduct a sufficient 
number of inspections for the period prior to November 2022, and even after 
commencing more regular inspections, from October 2022 to December 2023, NYCHA 
did not use timesheets, certified payrolls, or logbooks to calculate liquidated damages, 
but instead relied solely on in- person visits to the developments. For that entire 
period, NYCHA calculated liquidated damages of only $143,050. In contrast, during 
the first two months of 2024 (i.e., the final two months of the contract), NYCHA used 
evidence in addition to site visits to calculate liquidated damages, and for just that 
short period, calculated $412,965, indicating that, before these two months, duplicate 
billings, overbillings, and potentially inaccurate time sheets likely went unnoticed.  
OSS’s former Deputy Director and Security Manager Cabell was most directly 
responsible for ensuring the sufficiency of the security and fire guards’ performance 
from October 2019 through October 2022, when OSS failed to conduct and document 
sufficient inspections. Furthermore,  this official’s supervisors and other NYCHA 
 
83 NYCHA-Allied Universal Contract, at § 5.6 (“Prior to receiving payment from NYCHA for Services 
performed, all Invoice and all other documentation requested by NYCHA, and/or submitted by the 
Consultant, must be found satisfactory to NYCHA in form and subst ance before NYCHA will issue 
payment to the Consultant for the Invoice”). 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 23  
offices with the responsibility to oversee OSS similarly failed to take appropriate 
steps to ensure OSS complied with its responsibilities, even after becoming aware of 
the guards’ misconduct. Former OSS Director Rodriguez
84 supervised OSS Deputy 
Director and Security Manager Cabell from October 2019 until January 2022; former 
OSS Director Smith took on that supervisory role in August 2022.   
Vice President for Public Safety and Security Secreto, tasked with overseeing 
OSS, became aware of allegations of Allied Universal’s failures in approximately 
November 2021 when he received a complaint from the Chair of NYCHA’s Citywide 
Council of Presidents
85 alleging that guards were absent from their posts at the 
Jackson Houses development, a claim confirmed by the Vice President’s own 
observations at a subsequent site visit where only three of eight scheduled security 
guards were present. 86 In February 2022, Vice President for Public Safety Secreto 
sought direction regarding how to manage Allied Universal’s contract given their 
unsatisfactory performance. Secreto was instructed to document the vendor’s 
contract violations per NYCHA contract management practices. However, 
notwithstanding such instruction, OSS failed to send liquidated damages memoranda 
to Allied Universal until October 2022 and did not conduct inspections consistently 
until November 2022.  Subsequently, once OSS had begun docum enting Allied 
Universal’s noncompliance, OSS and the Procurement Department were able to 
accelerate the award process for the replacement of Allied Universal. It is also notable 
that Secreto did not refer the matter to DOI despite its systemic nature.  
Despite the guards’ widespread pattern of absences, NYCHA ultimately failed 
to promptly replace Allied Universal with new vendors. Because of OSS’s failures to 
consistently conduct and document field inspections and infractions during the first 
three years of the contract, and its lack of supervision, it was not until  early 2022 
that NYCHA became sufficiently aware of the problem to initiate the process of 
soliciting vendors to replace Allied Universal. Furthermore, NYCHA’s decision to 
contract with Allied Universal for all of the Authority’s security and fire guard 
services, instead of splitting the services among multiple vendors (and, alternatively, 
its lack of pre-qualified backup vendors to replace Allied Universal in the event of its 
 
84 Former Director Rodriguez’s last day as OSS Director was January 3, 2022.  The Director role 
remained vacant until former Director Smith assumed the role in August 2022.  
85 Citywide Council of Presidents, N.Y.C. HOUSING AUTHORITY,  
https://www.nyc.gov/site/nycha/residents/citywide-council-of-presidents.page (last visited March 24 , 
2025) (“At the citywide level, residents are represented by the Citywide Council of Presidents (CCOP). 
The CCOP is organized by ten districts in the city —Bronx North, Bronx South, Brooklyn East, 
Brooklyn South, Brooklyn West, Manhattan North, Manhattan South, Queens East, Queens West, 
and Staten Island. Every president of a recognized resident association is a member of the Citywide 
Council of Presidents”).  
86 DOI interviewed Secreto on May 11, 2023.  
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 24  
failure to perform) also hindered NYCHA’s ability to replace Allied Universal. As 
NYCHA had contracted only with Allied Universal to handle the entirety of its 
extensive security and fire guard needs, NYCHA did not have a readily available 
alternative vendor with an existing contract who might have been able to assume 
Allied Universa l’s duties and instead was required to initiate an entirely new 
procurement process to seek new vendors, which it began nearly at the end of the 
original contract term. By May 9, 2023, NYCHA prepared and issued an official 
request for proposals from four q ualified vendors, 87 broken down by borough, and 
accelerated the awarding process for the upcoming contracts for new guard services. 
However, due to the length of the procurement process, 88 NYCHA was unable to 
finalize the process of awarding the new contracts to vendors to replace Allied 
Universal before the contract’s original end date of November 2022. Therefore, 
NYCHA ultimately renewed Allied Universal’s contract twice, extending the end date 
to February 2024.   
 
Even after NYCHA had begun the process of procuring new vendors, 
conducting frequent inspections, and documenting infractions, NYCHA still lacked 
sufficient documentation of the guards’ poor performance. On June 6, 2023, NYCHA’s 
Vice President of Procureme nt Ethics and Vendor Responsibility, Jessica Heegan, 
emailed DOI advising DOI that NYCHA may default on its payments to Allied 
Universal and requesting information from DOI pertaining to Allied Universal’s 
deficiencies. At the time of Heegan’s request, DOI’s investigation of the fire guards 
was in its early stages (having commenced in March 2023); DOI had just completed 
its investigation concerning the security guards. While NYCHA was generally aware 
that DOI was conducting field visits as part of an invest igation into the security 
guards, DOI had not yet shared its findings with NYCHA; DOI shared its findings, 
noting that its investigation of the fire guards was ongoing, in response to the June 
6, 2023, request.   
 
By approximately the final year of the contract, NYCHA had improved its 
implementation of certain required oversight measures and reorganized its oversight 
of OSS and the Office of the Vice President for Public Safety and Security by 
designating the newly established Senior Vice President of Quality Assurance, 
Safety, and Technical Programs, Lauren Gray, to oversee these offices in May 2023, 
as described above. However, NYCHA’s oversight failures nevertheless enabled the 
 
87 These vendors include Wisdom, ISS, City Safe, and Securitas.  
88 According to NYCHA, the Authority used the New York State Office of General Services contract 
system in awarding these contracts, with the purported goal to provide NYCHA’s Program Unit with 
sufficient capacity and time to develop a new operating model and incorporate it into the solicitation 
for guard services, which may have also increased the overall length of the process of procuring 
replacements for Allied Universal. 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 25  
guards’ frequent absences which endangered vulnerable residents, led to overbilling 
of the Authority for guard shifts that were not in fact completed due to post 
abandonment, and ultimately delayed the process of replacing Allied Universal.  
2.   Allied Universal’s Oversight Responsibilities 
Allied Universal also had oversight responsibilities by contract that it failed to 
implement.  Allied Universal was required to establish and maintain a quality control 
plan, to include, at a minimum, two unscheduled site visits per shift per week by 
Allied Universal’s supervisory level staff to each post (and have sufficient supervisory 
staff to do so); q uarterly management meetings concerning the quality of services 
provided to NYCHA; and processes to identify and prevent deficiencies in the quality 
of services in order to maintain an acceptable level of performance.
89 However, DOI 
found that from the start of the contract term in October 2019 through March 2021, 
Allied Universal failed to consistently complete scheduled site visits, completing 
approximately 8,770 of the 13,240 total scheduled visits (approximately 66%) , 
averaging 248 missed visits per month. The number of completed visits per month 
also varied widely from 90% of scheduled visits completed per month to 0% of 
scheduled visits completed. For the month of July 2020, as well as from April 2021 
through Februa ry 2024, NYCHA did not have information about the number of 
scheduled or completed supervisory site visits.  Despite the fact that guards were 
frequently absent during this period, and falsified their timesheets, Allied Universal 
failed to bring any issues concerning the guards to NYCHA’s attention.   
Thus, it appears that Allied Universal failed to implement its oversight 
responsibilities with respect to its NYCHA contract, and NYCHA also failed to 
confirm Allied Universal’s compliance. For the period for which NYCHA obtained 
inspection records from Al lied Universal, DOI calculated that NYCHA was 
contractually entitled to approximately $290,550 in liquidated damages for 
documented instances of Allied Universal’s missed inspections.  OSS had also 
calculated liquidated damages for Allied Universal’s missed inspections during this 
time period, but OSS’s calculations had numerous errors, and it is unclear whether 
NYCHA ever in fact sought payment of damages for these infractions from Allied 
Universal. These damages were substantial and Allied Universal’s miss ed 
inspections likely facilitated guard absence or other misconduct, thereby endangering 
vulnerable residents. 
Other efforts NYCHA implemented to encourage Allied Universal to correct its 
security and fire guard performance were also largely ineffective. For example, in 
November 2022, OSS created an internal policy and procedure document and 
 
89 NYCHA-Allied Universal Contract, at §§ 3.8(a)(1)-(5). 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 26  
designated a team, consisting of a Contract Manager, Fire Safety/Tech Services 
committee, Invoice & Requisitions committee, and Compliance committee, to manage 
the Allied Universal contract and to improve oversight of the vendor.
90 While 
thereafter OSS completed more site inspections, the inspections did not improve 
guard performance, and as detailed above, OSS invoice review methodology was 
insufficient to identify either overbilled amounts (and to seek reimbursement) or 
contract v iolations entitling NYCHA to seek liquidated damages.  Regarding 
NYCHA’s attempts to improve fire guard coverage, NYCHA sent additional 
memoranda to Allied Universal in March and May of 2023 to highlight concerns about 
guards’ misconduct during the fires that occurred at NYCHA’s Ingersoll Houses, 
Douglass Houses, and Taft Houses, noting that when each fire occurred, there was 
no fire guard present (as verified by CCTV footage review), despite each location being 
designated as a Fire Watch Site. In the first of the two memoranda, NYCHA 
requested that Allied Universal submit an action plan.  
Allied Universal submitted a Staffing Accountability Plan
91 with an effective 
date of March 2023, detailing proposed measures to improve the security and fire 
guards’ performance, including increasing the field supervision head count, adding 
contingent guard staff, providing training to supervisors, improving comm unication 
with guards in the field, and implementing geofencing technology ( a virtual fence or 
perimeter around a physical location that can detect movement inside the virtual 
boundary) and electronic timekeeping (to remove the need for manual review and 
documentation of handwritten timesheets ) through a smart phone application,
92 
among other measures. However, despite proposing these measures with an effective 
date of March 2023, Allied Universal never provided evidence to NYCHA that Allied 
increased field supervisory and contingent guard staff, provided training to 
supervisors, improved communication with guards in the field, or implemented other 
measures proposed, and it does not appear that NYCHA ever requested proof that 
Allied Universal implemented these measures. While Allied Universal did have 
geofencing and electronic timek eeping capabilities, and generally began meeting 
more frequently with NYCHA to discuss the guards’ performance after NYCHA sent 
the fire incident memoranda, these measures did not prevent the post abandonment 
that was documented occurring throughout the la st year of the contract, as NYCHA 
continued to discover frequent instances of no shows and post abandonment and 
 
90 Office of Safety and Security, New York City Housing Authority, Unarmed Uniformed Security 
Guard Services Policy and Procedure (2022). 
91 See Exhibit, Allied Universal Staffing Accountability Action Plan.  
92 A geofence is a virtual fence or perimeter around a physical location.  Like a real fence, a geofence 
creates a separation between that location and the area around it. Unlike a real fence, it can also 
detect movement inside the virtual boundary. 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 27  
calculated thousands of dollars of liquidated damages in each of  the 11 months 
following the Plan’s effective date in March 2023.93  
3.  Oversight Failures—Conclusions  
NYCHA contracted with other companies to provide fire guards and security 
guards beginning in September 2023, after a contract was awarded in July 2023. 94 
NYCHA’s Fiscal Year 2025 Executive Plan did not include funding for unarmed 
security guards at the Senior Buildings as of July 1, 2024, which would have cost $6.8 
million per year.95 Instead, the Authority planned to request that officers of the New 
York City Police Department patrol developments and Department of Homeless 
Services conduct outreach. However, on July 1, 2024, the Authority announced that 
it had received funding for security guards at Senior Buildings and would continue 
to provide this service.
96  
Although NYCHA is no longer working with Allied Universal, the pattern of 
non-compliance that DOI identified, coupled with NYCHA’s failure to promptly 
identify and address that non-compliance, call for NYCHA to implement the following 
recommendations to im prove the quality of the safety and security services that 
NYCHA receives and prevent future instances of repeated non-compliance.  
As a result of these investigations, DOI has issued 12 recommendations to 
NYCHA. 
 
93 NYCHA has also attempted to highlight Allied Universal’s poor performance by completing five 
vendor evaluations in PASSPort, N.Y.C.’s procurement database, for Allied Universal’s performance 
from November 2021 to January 2024, giving Allied Universal a “p oor” or “unsatisfactory” rating in 
the four available categories (i.e., timeliness, fiscal, performance, and overall). NYCHA also sought to 
have six “cautions” listed on Allied Universal’s PASSPort profile related to the infractions that OSS 
documented from October 2022 to May 2023 and Allied Universal’s failure to have fire guards present 
during the three fires discussed above (on the N.Y.C. PASSPort database, the contracting agency is 
able to issue “cautions” regarding a vendor’s performance). However, NY CHA was informed by the 
Mayor’s Office of Contract Services that the information that the Authority presented (i.e., inspection 
records and liquidated damages memoranda) for the cautions was not appropriate for cautions, and 
instead was tantamount to performance evaluations. 
94 NYCHA awarded the contract to Wisdom Protective Services in July 2023, ISS Action in October 
2023, and Overwatch Services LLC, doing business as City Safe Partners Security, in January 2024.  
95 See Executive Budget Hearings – Public Housing: New York City Council Fiscal Year 2025 Executive 
Budget Hearings: Transcript of Hearing Before the Comm. on Public Housing Jointly with the Comm. 
on Finance, 2024-2025 Sess., pg. 23−25 (N.Y.C. 2024) (NYCHA states that it faces a $35 million-dollar 
deficit for its 2024 operating budget). 
96 Monica Morales, PIX11, Funding Restored for NYCHA Unarmed Security Guard Program (July 1, 
2024),https://pix11.com/news/monica-makes-it-happen/funding-restored-for-nycha-unarmed-security-
guard-program/; see also Press Release, N.Y.C. Council, N.Y.C. Council Speaker Adams, Finance Chair 
Brannan, Public Housing Chair Banks, Aging Chair Hudson Celebrate Full Funding Restoration for 
Security Guard Program at NYCHA Senior Developments (Nov. 15, 2024), 
https://council.nyc.gov/press/2024/11/15/2747/.   
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 28  
D. Recommendations 
1. NYCHA’s contracts for security and fire guard services should include, or be 
amended to include where applicable, a requirement that a vendor provide a 
smartphone application for the guards that incorporates geofencing technology (a 
virtual fence or perime ter around a physical location that can detect movement 
inside the virtual boundary) and electronic timekeeping (to remove the need for 
manual review and documentation of handwritten timesheets). The geofencing 
and electronic timekeeping application should record and send an alert to the 
vendor’s managerial staff when guards leave the boundary of their assigned post 
during their shift and should require guards performing assigned rounds to scan 
QR codes posted along their route. When the application is unav ailable, NYCHA 
should require the guard to call the designated OSS command center or use other 
specified means of communication to notify management when they leave and 
return to their assigned posts during their shift. NYCHA accepts in part. 
NYCHA states that it will implement this recommendation in future 
contracts and notes that its current solicitation of prospective vendors 
for future guard contracts will require vendors to implement technology 
capable of programming custom guard tours, mobile patrol s equencing, 
GPS geolocation, and instant notification on checkpoint punches. 
However, NYCHA states that applying this recommendation to current 
guard contracts would be infeasible because it would require substantive 
and material changes to the terms of the contract that would be too costly 
and time consuming to achieve.  
2. NYCHA’s contracts for security and fire guard services should require, or be 
amended to require where applicable, that the vendor provide the geofencing 
records to the Authority as backup data for the vendor’s invoices, along with the 
electronic timekeepin g records, and that the vendor’s own invoicing system be 
configured so that it prevents release of an invoice to NYCHA for payment if the 
electronic timekeeping and geofencing records indicate that the guard did not 
complete the entire scheduled shift list ed on the invoice. NYCHA accepts in 
part. Regarding configuration of the invoicing system, the Authority 
explains that —while it will not require the vendor’s own invoicing 
system to be configured so that it prevents release of an invoice to 
NYCHA for payment if the records a re incongruent —the Authority is 
drafting an addendum to its current solicitation that would require the 
vendor to cross -reference geofencing data to ensure its invoices to 
NYCHA only bill NYCHA for services that were in fact provided (un less 
otherwise approved in advance). The Authority will continue to 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 29  
implement this practice in future contracts. Regarding current 
contracts, NYCHA states that applying this recommendation would be 
infeasible because it would require substantive and material changes to 
the terms of the contract that would be too costly and time consuming to 
achieve. 
3. The Authority’s contracts for security and fire guard services should include a 
definition of “post abandonment” that specifies the minimum number of minutes 
that constitutes post abandonment, such as no more than 15 minutes.  NYCHA 
accepts in part.  NYCHA states that it will define post abandonment in 
its current solicitation of prospective vendors and in future executed 
contracts. NYCHA will not apply this recommendation to current guard 
contracts because it would require sub stantive and material changes to 
the terms of the contract that would be too costly and time consuming to 
achieve.  
4. NYCHA should provide security guards with a designated security desk or 
podium, on the main floor or lobby of the building, that bears the Authority’s 
insignia and that will serve as a central location for security guards to perform 
their duties, in order to reduce the risk that guards will spend time away from 
their posts while on duty. NYCHA accepts. 
5. NYCHA should require property management to post signage in the lobby that 
includes the contact information for NYCHA’s OSS for emergencies and for 
inquiries or complaints about the hours or absence of security and/or fire guards. 
NYCHA accepts. 
6. The Authority should require that OSS conduct a minimum number of 
unannounced inspections each month to assess security and fire guard 
performance, and that those inspections be documented. NYCHA should also 
require the Office of the Vice President of Publ ic Safety and Security to brief the 
Office of the Senior Vice President for Quality Assurance, Safety, and Technical 
Programs on a bi-weekly basis regarding the performance of the security and fire 
guard vendors. NYCHA accepts. 
7. The Authority should revise the Security Guard Service Field Inspection Report 
form to require that the OSS employee inspect (1) the lobby and stairwell doors to 
confirm whether the doors are secure and that the self-closing hardware functions 
properly and (2) that the security cameras are working, and the cameras’ view is 
not obstructed and/or diminished by lighting issues. NYCHA should also ensure 
that OSS staff tasked with conducting inspections are sufficiently trained to 
identify basic issues with door and CCTV camera functionality. NYCHA accepts. 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 30  
8. The Authority should revise the Manual to specify that OSS must immediately 
report to the development’s property management any deficiencies related to 
security infrastructure (i.e., broken or malfunctioning doors/locks or CCTV 
cameras) that OSS discovers during an inspection (as described above in 
recommendation 7) which cannot be immediately corrected by the OSS employee. 
The Manual should also require that property management, within 12 hours of 
receiving the deficiency report from OSS, generate a Work Order Ticket.  NYCHA 
accepts.  
9. NYCHA should revise the Security Guard Service Field Inspection Report form to 
require a more efficient, electronic method of delivery, such as scanning and 
uploading the completed form or making the form virtual and submittable on the 
Authority’s ServiceNow platform. NYCHA should also revise the Manual to 
specify this method of delivery. NYCHA accepts.  
10. NYCHA should revise the Manual to define the role of “Security Manager,” 
including by referencing the office title of the designated employee and their 
duties, and should specify the titles and duties of the employees responsible for 
the other roles involv ed in managing the security and fire guard contracts, 
including but not limited to those responsible for procurement, financial, and 
personnel management. NYCHA accepts. 
11. The Authority should establish a process for receipt and verification of invoices, 
certified payroll, electronic timekeeping, and geofencing records and should 
ensure that the documents accurately reflect the hours worked before issuing 
payment. NYCHA accepts.  
12. NYCHA should require the vendor to provide bi -weekly invoices, and so that 
NYCHA may cross-reference the invoices with CCTV footage when the Authority 
deems necessary (e.g., report of time theft, out -of-boundary alerts via electronic 
timekeeping, evidence of other contractual violations), the Authority should retain 
the relevant CCTV footage until they have reviewed and approved the invoice. 
NYCHA accepts in part. The Authority will continue to require the 
vendor to send monthly invoices; however, the techn ological upgrades 
required by NYCHA’s recently issued solicitation for guard services will 
require that the vendor provide this information to NYCHA in real time. 
NYCHA agrees to review this information on a bi -weekly basis and to 
retain the relevant CCTV footage until OSS has reviewed and approved 
the invoice.  
 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 31  
IV. CONCLUSION 
From October 2019 to February 2024, Allied Universal’s security and fire 
guards endangered residents of vulnerable Senior Buildings and Fire Watch Sites 
and violated contractual obligations by frequently abandoning their posts; some 
guards also attempted t o conceal these infractions by falsifying timesheets. Despite 
the severity of the guards’ non-compliance, NYCHA’s OSS failed to implement crucial 
measures to oversee Allied Universal for multiple years of the contract term —
including failing to document field inspections, notify Allied of guards’ violations, and 
accurately calculate liquidated damages. Senior OSS officials and other NYCHA 
offices with authority over OSS also failed to adequately supervise OSS and to detect 
or respond to these failures for mu ltiple years. Furthermore, NYCHA’s failures to 
document the guards’ widespread non -compliance, and failure to contract with 
multiple vendors or have pre-qualified vendors available to assume Allied Universal’s 
responsibilities, also restricted the Authority’s ability to terminate the contract early. 
While NYCHA has decided to continue providing security guards at its Senior 
Buildings and the legally required fire guards at all Fire Watch Sites, NYCHA must 
not repeat the oversight failures that occurred under the Allied Universal contract 
and must work  diligently to prevent future vendors’ guards from repeating these 
dangerous violations. DOI’s recommendations are designed to facilitate effective 
NYCHA oversight of security and fire guard vendors, and ultimat ely to ensure that 
NYCHA’s residents are protected from security and fire risks.    
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 32  
V. APPENDIX 
DOI CCTV Senior Buildings Security Guard Footage Review by Development 
 
 
  
Development # Of 
Bldgs. 
 
# Of 
Viewings 
Total 
Infractions 
Observed 
 
No- 
Show 
$150 
Abandoning 
Post $300 
Out Of 
Uniform 
$100 
Total 
Liquidated 
Damages 
Borinquen 
Plaza I 
1 3 3 0 3 0 $900.00  
Borinquen 
Plaza II 
1 2 2 2 0 0 $300.00  
Chelsea 
Addition 
1 10 10 0 10 0 $3,000.00  
College 
Avenue 
1 2 2 0 2 0 $600.00  
Conlon Lifhe 1 2 1 0 1 0 $300.00  
Corsi (2 
shifts - 4 
guards) 
1 4 2 0 2 0 $600.00  
Harborview 
Terrace 
1 2 2 0 2 0 $600.00  
LaGuardia 1 2 1 0 1 0 $300.00  
Leavitt 1 2 2 0 2 0 $600.00  
Lower East 
Side 
1 2 1 0 1 0 $300.00  
New Lane 1 5 4 0 4 0 $1,200.00  
Robbins 
Plaza 
1 2 1 0 1 0 $300.00  
Shelton 
Houses 
1 2 0 0 0 0 $0.00  
Surfside 
Gardens I 
1 1 1 0 1 0 $300.00  
Surfside 
Gardens II-  
1 3 3 0 3 0 $900.00  
UPACA #5 1 5 4 0 4 0 $1,200.00  
UPACA #6 1 2 2 0 2 0 $600.00  
White 
(Washington) 
1 2 2 1 1 0 $450.00  
West 
Brighton 
1 2 2 2 0 0 $300.00  
Totals: 19 55 45 5 40 0 $12,750.00  
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 33  
Allied Universal Staffing Accountability Action Plan 
 
 

 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 34  
 

 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 35  
 
NYCHA Security Guard Service Field Inspection Report Form 
 
 
