more 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
JOCELYN E. STRAUBER 
COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE Release #25-2025 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
MONDAY, MAY 19, 2025 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
    
DOI ISSUES REPORT ON EXCESSIVE WORKERS’ COMPENSATION CLAIMS BY  
NYC DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTION EMPLOYEES 
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Investigation (“DOI”), 
issued a Report today on excessive workers’ compensation claims by City Department of Correction 
(“DOC”) employees. In Fiscal Year 2024, for example, the City paid more than $340 million for claims by 
DOC employees; in that same year, it paid just under $225 million for claims by  employees of all other 
Mayoral agencies combined.1 During the last three complete fiscal years — 2022, 2023, and 2024 — New 
York City’s total expenses for workers’ compensation claims by DOC employees exceeded $1 billion.  DOI 
began investigating this issue after several City agencies , including the City Law Department,  reported 
concerns to DOI about the volume of workers’ compensation claims by DOC employees.  A copy of DOI’s 
Report follows this release and can be found at the following link :  
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2025/25Rpt.Release.WorkersComp05.19.2025.pdf   
 
Also today, DOI and the United States Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York 
announced the arrests  of one current and two former DOC correction officers on charges of healthcare 
fraud, mail fraud and false statements related to healthcare matters  stemming from alleged schemes to 
submit false and fraudulent worker’s compensation claims to the New York S tate Workers’ Compensation 
Board.2 That release can be found by clicking here. 
  
DOI Commissioner Jocelyn E. Strauber said, “ New York City’s expenditures on Workers’ 
Compensation payments have increased by hundreds of millions of dollars over the past decade, largely 
driven by the DOC employees’ increased claims . This Report examines the volume of claims, and 
recommends four policy and procedure re forms — two each to the  City Law Department and DOC — to 
strengthen oversight pertaining to the City’s payment of these benefits. I thank the DOI team for their diligent 
work, and the City agencies, particularly the City Law Department, which raised concerns about submitted 
claims and referred the matter to DOI.” 
Under New York law, employers must pay workers’ compensation benefits when an employee 
suffers a disability or dies from an injury that “aris[es] out of and in the course of” th eir employment, 
regardless of fault. See N.Y. Workers’ Comp. L. § 10(1). Through this system, workers who are injured on 
the job are entitled to medical care for their work -related injury or illness, as well as a portion of their lost 
wages if their injury  either prevents them from working more than seven calendar days or if they 
permanently lose a portion of the function of a part of their body. 
 
                                                           
1 Uniformed firefighters, police officers and sanitation workers are statutorily exempt from the Workers’ 
Compensation law and therefore not included in the comparison. 
2 Indictments are accusations. Defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty.   
 

2 
 
New York City’s annual expenditures on workers’ compensation payments have risen by hundreds 
of millions of dollars in recent years, driven largely by increased claims by employees at the DOC. The cost 
of claims by DOC employees exceeded $100 million each fiscal year since 2017, and exceeded $300 
million each fiscal year since 2021.  Between Fiscal Year 2015 and Fis cal Year 2024, workers’ 
compensation expenses for DOC employees grew by approximately 337%, from approximately $78 million 
to approximately $341 million. In comparison, between Fiscal Year 2015 and Fiscal Year 2024, the workers’ 
compensation expenses of al l other Mayoral agencies combined grew by only 65%, from approximately 
$135 million to approximately $223 million. 
 
 Although DOI’s investigation is continuing, this Report makes recommendations to the City Law 
Department and DOC to address the volume of claims submitted by DOC employees.  
 
 The Law Department should: 
 
1: Appoint a Director of Claims Integrity responsible for identifying potentially fraudulent workers’ 
compensation claims by City employees. This individual should also serve as a liaison to DOI, 
referring potential instances of fraud for investigation as appropriate.  The Law Department 
notified DOI that it will accept this recommendation insofar as it receives funding for this new 
position from the City. 
 
2: Evaluate the anti -fraud training it provides to City employees responsible for reviewing and 
approving workers’ compensation claims in order to determine whether modifications are 
appropriate. That evaluation should be conducted in coordination with DOI.  The Law 
Department notified DOI that it accepts this recommendation.  
 
 DOC should: 
  
1: Appoint a Director of Workplace Safety who is responsible for monitoring workplace accident 
statistics, examining safety conditions at DOC facilities, developing clear safety protocols, and 
training employees on best practices for workplace safety. DOC notified DOI that it will consider 
this recommendation , and that it  maintains and continues to enhance both its training and 
directives as they relate to safety protocols. 
 
2: Update and reissue Directi ve #1004, titled “Procedures for Filing Workers ’ Compensation 
Claims.” DOC notified DOI that it accepts this recommendation. 
 
Commissioner Strauber thanked NYC Corporation Counsel Muriel Goode-Trufant for referring this 
matter to DOI and for her staff’s assistance.  
  
This examination was conducted by Assistant Inspector General Gina Diaz, Confidential 
Investigator Joseph Safer -Bakal, Deputy Inspector General Trenton Sweeney, and Assistant Inspector 
General Jeffrey Freeman of DOI’s Office of the Inspector General for the Law Department; and the Report 
was written with assistance from DOI’s Law Fellow Ferdinand G. Suba, Jr., under the supervision of Senior 
Inspector General Andrew Sein, Deputy Commissioner of Strategic Initiatives Christopher Ryan, and 
Deputy Commissioner/ Chief of Investigations Dominick Zarrella.   
  
DOI is one of the oldest law-enforcement agencies in the country and New York City’s corruption watchdog. Investigations 
may involve any agency, officer, elected official or employee of the City, as well as those who do business with or receive benefits 
from the City. DOI’s strategy attacks corruption comprehensively through systemic investigations that lead to high-impact arrests, 
preventive internal controls and operational reforms that improve the way the City runs. 
 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
  
 
 
 
New York City 
Department of Investigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jocelyn E. Strauber 
Commissioner 
 
Andrew Sein 
Inspector General for the New York City Law Department 
 
 
May 2025 
 
 
DOI’s Investigation of Excessive 
Workers’ Compensation Claims by City 
Department of Correction Employees 
 
 
Investigation of Excessive Workers’ Compensation Claims May 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
I. Workers’ Compensation Claims by Employees of the New York City Department of Correction ....................... 1 
II. The Workers’ Compensation System for New York City Employees ..................................................................... 4 
III. Policy and Procedure Recommendations ................................................................................................................ 6 
A. PPRs to the New York City Law Department ........................................................................................................ 6 
B. PPRs to the New York City Department of Correction ......................................................................................... 8 
IV. Conclusion ................................................................................................................................................................... 9 
Investigation of Excessive Workers’ Compensation Claims May 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 1  
I. Workers’ Compensation Claims by Employees of the New York City Department of 
Correction 
 
Under New York law, employers must pay workers’ compensation benefits 
when an employee suffers a disability or dies from an injury that “aris[es] out of and 
in the course of” their employment, regardless of fault. See N.Y. Workers’ Comp. L. § 
10(1). Through this system, workers who are injured on the job are entitled to medical 
care for their work-related injury or illness, as well as a portion of their lost wages if 
their injury either prevents them from working more than seven calendar days or if 
they permanently lose a portion of the function of a part of their body.
1 As described 
by one judge, the New York’s Workers’ Compensation Law is based on “basic 
principles of fairness.” Matter of Zamora v. New York Neurologic Assoc. , 19 N.Y.3d 
186, 195 (2012) (Lippman, C.J., dissenting).   
 
New York  City’s annual expenditures on  workers’ compensation payments 
have risen by hundreds of millions of dollars in recent years , driven largely by 
increased claims by employees at the New York City Department of Correction 
(“DOC”). As illustrated by Figure 1, below, 2 the cost of c laims by DOC employees 
exceeded $100 million each f iscal year since 2017, and  exceeded $300 million each 
fiscal year since 2021. In Fiscal Year 2024 alone, workers’ compensation claims by 
employees of DOC cost the City more than $340 million. 
 
                                                           
1 New York State Workers’ Compensation Board, Injured Worker’s Toolkit , 
https://www.wcb.ny.gov/content/main/Workers/injured-workers-toolkit.jsp (last visited May 14, 2025). 
 
2 Statistics cited in this report about the City’s expenditures on workers’ compensation claims were provided by 
the New York City Law Department. DOI also obtained data and other information relating to these expenditures 
from the New York City Office of Management and Budget that may be incorporated in this report.  
Investigation of Excessive Workers’ Compensation Claims May 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 2  
 
Figure 1. Workers’ compensation expenses for claims by employees of DOC,                                    
Fiscal Year 2015 through Fiscal Year 2024.  
 
In recent years, the City’s payments for workers’ compensation claims by DOC 
employees have far exceeded those for claims by employees of other Mayoral agencies. 
In Fiscal Year 2024, for example, the City paid more than $340 million for claims by 
DOC employees; in that same year, it paid just under $ 225 million for claims by 
employees of all other Mayoral agencies combined.3 During the last three complete 
fiscal years—2022 , 2023, and 20 24—New York City’s total expenses for workers’ 
compensation claims by DOC employees exceeded $1 billion.   
 
Figure 2, below, illustrates this trend, and shows how the expenses for DOC -
related workers’ compensation claims grew at a rate that significantly outpaced that 
of all other City Mayoral agencies. 
 
                                                           
3 A list of agencies classified as “Mayoral” for purposes of this report is included in Appendix A.   
$0
$50
$100
$150
$200
$250
$300
$350
$400
FY 2015 FY 2016 FY 2017 FY 2018 FY 2019 FY 2020 FY 2021 FY 2022 FY 2023 FY 2024
Workers' Compensation Expenses - Cost of Claims by 
Employees of the NYC Department of Correction ($ in Millions) 
Investigation of Excessive Workers’ Compensation Claims May 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 3  
 
Figure 2. Comparing City -funded workers’ compensation expenses for claims by employees of 
DOC to expenses for claims by employees of other agencies, Fiscal Year 2015 through Fiscal 
Year 2024.  
 
Between Fiscal Year 201 5 and Fiscal Year 2 024, workers’ compensation 
expenses for DOC employees grew by approximately 337%, from approximately $78 
million to approximately $341 million. In comparison, between Fiscal Year 2015 and 
Fiscal Year 2024, the workers’ compensation expenses of all other Mayoral agencies 
combined grew by only 65%, from approximately $135 million to approximately $223 
million. 
 
Between at least Fiscal Year 2015 and Fiscal Year 2024, DOC led City Mayoral 
agencies not only in total amounts paid, but also in t he total number of claims filed 
per year. In Fiscal Year 2024, for example, DOC employees filed 3,547 new workers’ 
compensation claims. Among Mayoral agencies, Fire Department employees 
(excluding uniformed firefighters) filed the second-largest4 number of claims (1,725); 
employees of the Police Department (excluding uniformed police officers ) filed the 
third-largest number of claims (875) during that same fiscal year.5 According to data 
from the Law Department, DOC employees’ total claims per year did decline in Fiscal 
                                                           
4 If non-Mayoral agencies are also considered in the analysis, the second -largest number of claims were filed by 
employees of the Department of Education (2,842) and the third-largest number of claims were filed by employees 
of New York City Health + Hospitals (2,711) in Fiscal Year 2024.   
 
5 As discussed below, uniformed firefighters and police officers are not covered by the Workers’ Compensation 
Law.  
 
Department of 
Correction
All other Mayoral 
Agencies
$0
$50
$100
$150
$200
$250
$300
$350
$400
FY 2015 FY 2016 FY 2017 FY 2018 FY 2019 FY 2020 FY 2021 FY 2022 FY 2023 FY 2024
New York City Workers' Compensation Expenses, by Agency
($ in Millions) 
Investigation of Excessive Workers’ Compensation Claims May 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 4  
Years 2023 and 2024, however, from a peak of 5,830 claims that were filed in Fiscal 
Year 2022.6    
 
Several City agencies have expressed concerns about the volume of the claims 
by DOC employees  and have referred the issue  to DOI for further investigation. 
Following these referrals, DOI  initiated a  proactive investigation into potential ly 
fraudulent activity involving workers’ compensation claims by City employees.  
 
On May 19, 2025, DOI and the United States Attorney’s Office for the Southern 
District of New York announced arrests of three City employees —one current DOC 
correction officer and t wo former DOC correction officers who are now NYPD police 
officers—on charges of making fraudulent workers’ compensation claims related to 
their employment at DOC.  
 
To date, DOI’s investigation has resulted in charges against only these three 
employees, and DOI is not yet in a position to conclude that other City employees are 
submitting false claims for workers’ compensation. However, the pattern of claims by 
DOC employees as described above raises serious concerns that fraud in the workers’ 
compensation space goes well beyond these three charged employees.  
 
Although DOI’s investigation is continuing, t his report will make several 
recommendations to the New York City Law Department  (the “Law Department”) 
and DOC to address the volume of claims submitted by DOC employees. We explain 
below the legal and administrative processes  underpinning the workers’ 
compensation system as it relates to City employees and then describe our proposed 
recommendations.  
 
II. The Workers’ Compensation System for New York City Employees 
 
“Virtually all employers in New York State must provide workers’ 
compensation coverage for their employees,”
7 and may do so through the New York 
                                                           
6 In response to a draft of this report, DOC wrote, in part: “[I]n the last four calendar years, the number of claims 
filed by DOC employees have drastically declined. The number of workers’ compensation claims filed by DOC 
employees in 2024 was 2,801, compared to 3,545 claims filed in 2023.” These figures are consistent with data that 
the New York City Law Department provided to DOI, which showed 7,093 clams by DOC employees in calendar 
year 2021; 5,420 in calendar year 2022; 3,546 in calendar year 2023; and 2,801 in calendar year 20 24. When 
presented by fiscal year, however, the data shows an increase from 2021 to 2022, and then a more modest decline 
from 2022 to 2024: 5,314 claims in Fiscal Year 2021; 5,830 claims in Fiscal Year 2022; 4,175 claims in Fiscal Year 
2023; and 3,547 claims in Fiscal Year 2024.   
 
7 New York State Workers’ Compensation Board, Is Workers’ Compensation Coverage Required , 
https://www.wcb.ny.gov/content/main/coverage-requirements-wc/wc-coverage-required.jsp (last visited May 14, 
2025).  
Investigation of Excessive Workers’ Compensation Claims May 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 5  
State Insurance Fund (“NYSIF”), “a not-for-profit agency of the State of New York”8; 
a pri vate insurance carrier; or self -insurance. There are, however, several limited 
categories of employees in New York State—including certain City employees —who 
are not required to be covered by the Workers’ Compensation Law. See N.Y. Workers’ 
Comp. L. §§ 2(3)-(4), 3(1). 
 
The City self -insures with respect to workers’ compensation claims by its 
employees, meaning that any awards that are paid are directly funded by public 
money. See N.Y. Workers’ Comp. L. § 50(4). Certain uniformed employees —
firefighters, police officers, and sanitation workers— are statutorily exempt from the 
Workers’ Compensation Law ; however, City and State law  establish alternate 
systems for addressing the costs of these employees’ claims for work-related injuries.
9  
 
Like other workers in New York State, City employees must submit workers’ 
compensation claims to the Workers’ Compensation Board. The Workers’ 
Compensation Board evaluates and processes each claim, adjudicates any disputes 
that arise, and ensures the delivery of benefits to injured workers. The City is 
represented by the Law Department in proceedings before the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. On an annual basis, the Workers’ Compensation Division of 
the Law Department receives approximately 17,500 new claims, over 16,000 proposed 
scheduling orders, and more than 350,000 medical bills, while also appearing at over 
15,000 hearings.
10 Every city agency must keep a record of and provide  to the Law 
Department any workers’ compensation claim that is filed by an y employee. See 
N.Y.C. Admin. Code § 12-127(c)(2). 
 
The New York State Workers’ Compensation Law recognizes four categories of 
disability: (1) temporary total disability, (2) temporary partial disability, (3) 
permanent total disability, and (4) permanent partial disability.11  
 
Many of the claims that have driv en the increase at DOC are for  permanent 
partial disability. A worker who has suffered a permanent partial disability has 
permanently lost only a part of their wage- earning capacity. Depending on the body 
                                                           
8 New York State Workers’ Compensation Board, Employers: Workers’ Compensation Insurance, 
https://www.wcb.ny.gov/content/main/Employers/workers-compensation-
insurance.jsp#:~:text=NYSIF%20is%20a%20not%2Dfor,York%20State%20Workers%27%20Compensation%20B
oard (last visited May 14, 2025). 
 
9 See generally N.Y.C. Admin. Code § 12-127(a); N.Y. Gen. Mun. L. §§ 205, 205-C, 207, 207-A.   
 
10 New York City Law Department, Legal Divisions, Workers’ Compensation , 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/law/divisions/workers-compensation.page (last visited May 14, 2025).  
 
11 New York State Workers’ Compensation Board, Workers’ Compensation, Disability C lassifications, 
https://www.wcb.ny.gov/content/main/Workers/DisabilityClass.jsp (last visited May 14, 2025).  
 
Investigation of Excessive Workers’ Compensation Claims May 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 6  
part affected and the nature of the permanent disability, that worker may earn a 
Schedule Loss of Use (“SLU”) award —a lump-sum payment for on -the-job injuries 
involving the body’s limbs and extremities such as arms, hands, hips, and legs as well 
as eyesight and hearing. 12 SLU awards are mainly issued for “soft-tissue” injuries 
that impact the person’s range of motion. Meanwhile, “Non-Schedule” Loss benefits 
are issued for other kinds of injuries, including to the spine, heart, and brain.13  
 
The size of the S LU awards depends on the total “loss of use” of a body part, 
which is quantified through a percentage that is assigned by a physician. Because 
workers seeking an SLU award are not required to lose any time from work, many 
DOC employees who receive SLU awards have also continued to receive their usual 
wages on top of significant payments for what have been deemed to be permanent 
partial disabilities . These payments are driving the large increase in the City’s 
workers’ compensation expenses.   
 
III. Policy and Procedure Recommendations 
 
DOI’s investigation into fraudulent workers’ compensation claims by City 
employees is continuing, as noted above. However, in order to reduce risk in this 
system going forward, DOI is issuing the following policy and procedure 
recommendations (“PPRs”) to the Law Department and to DOC.  
 
A. PPRs to the New York City Law Department 
 
1. The Law Department should appoint a Director of Claims 
Integrity responsible for identifying potentially fraudulent workers’ 
compensation claims by City employees.  This individual should  also 
serve as a liaison to DOI , referring  potential instances of fraud for 
investigation as appropriate.  
 
 The Law Department should appoint a Director of Claims Integrity  who is 
trained and empowered to identify patterns of anomalous activity involving workers’ 
compensation claims and particular claims with indicia of fraud. Although DOI, as 
the City’s Inspector General, is generally responsible for investigating fraud against 
the City , the agency administering this program on a daily basis ( i.e., the Law 
Department) should have its own anti -fraud resources, as well as  a mechanism for 
                                                           
12 New York State Workers’ Compensation Board, Workers’ Compensation, Awards for Loss of Use or Permanent 
Disability, https://www.wcb.ny.gov/content/main/Workers/AwardLossUsePermDisability.jsp (last visited May 14, 
2025).  
 
13 Id. 
 
Investigation of Excessive Workers’ Compensation Claims May 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 7  
City employees and others to report potentially fraudulent claims—such as a hotline 
or other established point of contact—that can ultimately be shared with DOI .    
 
Because the City “self-insures” with respect to workers’ compensation claims, 
the Law Department should determine whether the private insurance industry or the 
New York State Insuranc e Fund (“NYSIF”), the “largest provider of workers’ 
compensation insurance in New York State,” 14 should provide guidance on how to 
structure this role, which may focus substantially on providing investigative support 
during litigation and identifying cases that should be referred  to DOI  for more 
significant investigation.  
 
The Law Department notified DOI that it will accept this recommendation  
insofar as it receives funding for this new position from the City.   
 
2. The Law Department should evaluate the anti -fraud training it 
provides to  City employees responsible for reviewing and approving 
workers’ compensation claims in order to  determine whether 
modifications are appropriate.  That evaluation should be conducted i n 
coordination with DOI.   
 
The Law Department should review the training it provides to members of its 
Workers’ Compensation Division to help them identify workers’ compensation fraud 
and determine whether enhancements to the training program are warranted.  
 
Similarly, the Law Department should review the training it provides to 
supervisory City employees at agencies with high claim volume about red flags of 
fraud—such as discrepancies between a claimant’s version and witnesses’ accounts 
of the workplace injury or an accident that is inconsistent with normal job duties—to 
determine whether enhancements are warranted. Relevant City employees should be 
trained to identify and report concerns about individual claims to the Director of 
Claims Integrity. Any education campaign should take care to not discourage City 
employees from making legitimate workers’ compensation claims.   
 
The Law Department  should coordinate these evaluations of its anti -fraud 
training programs with DOI.  
 
The Law Department notified DOI that it accepts this recommendation.   
 
 
 
                                                           
14 NYSIF, About NYSIF, https://ww3.nysif.com/Home/FooterPages/Column1/AboutNYSIF (last visited May 14, 
2025). 
Investigation of Excessive Workers’ Compensation Claims May 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 8  
B. PPRs to the New York City Department of Correction 
 
DOI is further issuing the following PPRs to the Department of Correction:  
 
1. DOC should appoint a Director of  Workplace Safety who  is 
responsible for monitoring workplace accident statistics, examining 
safety conditions at DOC facilities, developing clear safety protocols, and 
training employees on best practices for workplace safety.  
 
DOC should seek to mitigate the risk of claims that originate from potentially 
unsafe workplace conditions by appointing a Director of Workplace Safety , who will 
be charged with examining safety conditions at all DOC facilities  and identifying 
high-risk ar eas where workplace injuries are more likely to occur.  The Director 
should also be charged with  reviewing areas where accidents  reportedly took place 
and determining whether those areas are properly maintained and supervised.  
 
The Director should have experience in workplace safety, and the necessary 
staff to fulfill their mission, ideally civilian, non-uniformed employees. 
 
 DOC responded to this recommendation as follows:  
 
“DOC will consider this recommendation. The Departmen t maintains 
and continues to enhance both its training and directives as they relate 
to safety protocols. The training is under regular review by the 
Department’s Training and Development Division and the operative 
directives are updated accordingly [ sic] the Department’s Policy and 
Procedure Unit. Further, there is currently staff in the Department’s 
Health Management Division tasked with tracking and reviewing 
workplace injury incidents.”  
 
2. DOC should update and r eissue Directive # 1004, titled 
“Procedures for Filing Workers [sic] Compensation Claims.”  
 
Directive 1004, “Procedures for Filing Workers Compensation Claims,” has not 
been revised since 2001 and should be updated and re-circulated to DOC employees. 
Several addresses and phones numbers in Directive 1004 appear to be outdated, and 
there are no instructions as to how workers’ compensation claims can be submitted 
by electronic means.     
 
DOC notified DOI that it accepts this recommendation.   
 
 
 
Investigation of Excessive Workers’ Compensation Claims May 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 9  
 
 
IV. Conclusion  
 
The workers’ compensation system is vital to protecting employees who are 
injured on the job. F raudulent claims, however, undermine public confidence in the 
system and divert resources from other important public purposes.  
 
DOI will continue to work as appropriate with its law enforcement partners to 
investigate fraudulent claims  by City employees . In the meantime, the Law 
Department and DOC should accept and implement the above -referenced 
recommendations in order to reduce the risk of fraud, as well as improve safety 
conditions at DOC facilities and clarify DOC’s internal reporting procedures for 
workers’ compensation claims.     
 
  
Investigation of Excessive Workers’ Compensation Claims May 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 10  
APPENDIX A 
 
For purposes of this report, the following agencies are classified as “Mayoral” 
agencies:  
 
Administration for Children’s Services 
Business Integrity Commission 
Economic Development Corporation  
Civilian Complaint Review Board 
Department of Small Business Services 
Department of Buildings 
Department of City Planning 
Department of Consumer Affairs 
Department of Cultural Affairs 
Department of Design and Construction 
Department of Environmental Protection 
Department of Finance 
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene 
Department of Homeless Services 
Department of Investigation 
Department of Juvenile Justice 
Department of Parks and Recreation 
Department of Probation 
Department of Sanitation 
Department of Transportation 
Department of Citywide Administration Services 
Department of Housing Preservation and Development 
Office of Technology and Innovation 
Department of Records and Information Services 
Department of Youth and Community Development 
Financial Information Services Agency 
Fire Department 
Human Resources Administration 
Human Rights Commission 
Landmarks 
Law Department 
Mayor’s Office of Contract Services 
NYC Department for the Aging 
NYC Department of Veteran’s Services 
Office of Emergency Management 
Office of Labor Relations 
Office of Management and Budget 
Office of the Mayor 
Investigation of Excessive Workers’ Compensation Claims May 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 11  
Office of Payroll Administration 
Police Department 
Tax Commission 
 