1
A PATH FORWARD:
THE BLUEPRINT  
TO CLOSE RIKERS
I N D E P E N D E N T  R I K E R S  C O M M I S S I O N 
W W W. M O R E J U S T N Y C . O R G
M A R C H  2 0 2 5

E X E C U T I V E  S U M M A R Y
R I K E R S  D ATA  S N A P S H O T 
T H E  B L U E P R I N T  T O  C L O S E  R I K E R S 
I. Rikers Must Close
II. NYC Must Move to a Safer Borough-Based System, and Add 500 Secure 
Psychiatric Treatment Beds – Outside the Jails
III. Despite Urgency, Borough-Based Facilities Are Delayed & Must Be Sped Up
IV. NYC Jail Population is Artificially Inflated Above What’s Necessary for Safety
V. Safely Right-size Jail Population, Part 1: NYS Office of Court Administration 
Initiative to Speed Up Criminal Cases
VI. Safely Right-Size Jail Population Part 2: Priority Investments and Reforms
VII. Phase in Investments to Fill Gaps in Treating Serious Mental Illness and 
Addiction, and Combat Reoffending
VIII. Revamp Department of Correction Operations and Culture
IX. Borough-Based System Will Save Over $2 Billion Per Year Once Up and Running
X. Invest Deeply in Communities with Borough Jails
XI. Commit to and Start Master Planning for Renewable Rikers
XII. Appoint Two Senior, Full-Time Officials Dedicated to Closure and Transformation
Conclusion
A P P E N D I X  A
A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
E N D N O T E S
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1 1 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
. . . . . . . . . . .  24
. . . . . . . . . .  27
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
. . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  41
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  51
. . . . . .  69
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  72
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  74
. . . . . . .  86
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  88
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9 0
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9 6
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9 8

EXECUTIVE  
SUMMARY
1
A MORE JUST NYC | INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

2
Decrepit, dysfunctional, and violent, Rikers is a crumbling, inordinately expensive 
incubator of misery and reoffending. Every day its eight operating jails are open, 
incarcerated people and staff are at grave, unnecessary risk, and public safety  
is degraded.1 
Rikers fails New Yorkers and costs us all dearly, on a human and a financial level – more than 
$400,000 per incarcerated person per year. Rikers’ impact and its neglect for decades have been 
disproportionately felt. 85% of uniformed staff are Black or Latino. 88% of incarcerated people are 
also Black or Latino.
For the sake of public safety, basic morality, and fiscal responsibility, Rikers must close as soon as 
possible. Anything less is unacceptable. That was true when our Commission issued our first call to 
close Rikers in 2017. It is even more true today. 
In October 2023, City Council Speaker Adrienne Adams re-appointed the Independent Rikers  
Commission, which was first established in 2016 by then-Speaker Melissa Mark-Viverito. Our renewed 
mission: to re-examine and refresh the plan to close the jail complex on Rikers Island, given the  
post-COVID-19 world and the New York City law that mandates Rikers close entirely by August 31, 
2027. After adding new members to broaden our Commission’s base of expertise and representation, 
we undertook over a year of research, analysis, and consultations. This report provides our 
unanimous conclusions and recommendations. 
T H E  R I K E R S  I S L A N D  J A I L  C O M P L E X  M U S T  C L O S E
C H A R T I N G  A  PAT H  T O  C L O S U R E
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
The blueprint laid out here charts a path to safely and permanently close Rikers as soon as  
possible in this post-COVID world. Moving from Rikers to a borough-based system of jails and  
secure hospital-based beds promises to increase safety, inside and outside the facilities, and save 
New York City over $2 billion per year, once the new system is fully operational.
Our Commission does not claim to have all the answers or that this is a perfect plan. It is the best 
collection of the reasonable options we have today, based on the data, deep analysis, and our 
Commission’s collective experience. That said, we consider this blueprint to be a living document, 
one that our Commission plans to revisited regularly to assess progress, ensure the very best ideas 
are pushed forward, and new initiatives undertaken when necessary. Even as all stakeholders must 
act urgently, this blueprint will necessarily be implemented in phases over the next several years. 
That allows all actors to be methodical and thoughtful, adjusting as necessary, while remaining within 
appropriate fiscal constraints.  

3
In developing our recommendations, our Commission paid particular attention to the wishes of 
crime victims in New York City. Our recent poll of 1,800 New York City residents, almost 1,300 of 
whom were crime victims, done in conjunction with the Alliance for Safety and Justice, found that 
contrary to what many may expect, crime victims overwhelmingly support moving people with 
mental illness into secure treatment facilities instead of jails, speeding up trials, and housing 
people who cannot safely be released in smaller jails near courthouses. Notably, those are all key 
components of the plan to close Rikers.2 Crime victims also reported significant deficits in the support 
available and provided to them, something which must be rectified.3  
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
C E N T E R I N G  T H E  V O I C E S  O F  C R I M E  V I C T I M S
Leadership by officeholders – current and future – and stakeholders will be essential to urgently 
bring the damage of Rikers to an end. Indeed, as we have seen over the past few decades in New 
York City, jail populations and crime rates rise and fall significantly as a result of changes in City and 
State investments, policies, and approach – all of which we seek to shape in this report.
From the early 1990s through 2019, crime and incarceration were both sharply down due to a 
concerted prioritization by a wide range of stakeholders of those intertwined goals, to better the 
public good. New York City unquestionably benefited.
In the 2020s, crime rates and the incarcerated population increased not only due to the pandemic’s 
impact on crime in communities around the city, but also because of insufficient attention, policy 
support, and will to act in ways that both increase safety and reduce the jail population. This has 
left a jail population that is artificially inflated beyond what is necessary to ensure public safety, due 
to the unacceptably large number of people with serious mental illness in the jails and the unduly 
long periods of time people have to wait for their cases to be resolved. A sense of urgency has been 
missing to address these and other drivers of the jail population.
Similar attention, urgency, and leadership must be paid to the other pieces of the plan to close Rikers, 
including building as swiftly as possible the borough-based system of jails and secure hospital-based 
beds that will replace Rikers, and transforming the Department of Correction. For instance, while the 
delays in signing contracts for the borough-based construction were due primarily to COVID and 
market conditions, the length of time the design and construction will take under those contracts can 
and must be shortened. Meanwhile, the Department of Correction has to prioritize staffing the first set 
of hospital-based beds that are complete, but sit empty while very ill people remain stuck at Rikers.
L E A D E R S H I P  A N D  A  S E N S E  O F  U R G E N C Y  A R E  E S S E N T I A L
B O L D  A C T I O N  W I L L  C L O S E  R I K E R S  A N D  I N C R E A S E  S A F E T Y
Everyone responsible for the criminal justice and incarceration systems in New York City must now 
and in the future provide strong leadership and initiative to close Rikers and move safely and quickly 
toward a better future. We are pleased that we already see action. In the past few months, the Office 
of Court Administration has stepped up to institute a dramatic new citywide initiative to speed up case 
processing, which will enhance justice for incarcerated people and crime victims, and could safely 

4
I N D E P E N D E N T  R I K E R S  C O M M I S S I O N ’ S  F A C I L I T I E S  P L A N
5,000
∼360
500
1,040
250
4,500
T O TA L  B E D S
S E C U R E 
H O S P I TA L  B E D S
S E C U R E  
F O R E N S I C 
P S Y C H I AT R I C 
T R E AT M E N T 
B E D S
B E D S  I N  E A C H
B E D S  F O R  W O M E N 
I N  Q U E E N S  J A I L
104
∼150
∼105
B E D S  I N  B E L L E V U E
B E D S  I N  W O O D H U L L
B E D S  I N  N O R T H - 
C E N T R A L  B R O N X
P R O J E C T E D  J A I L 
P O P U L AT I O N
(4,160 total)
Ideally at a State facility  
in or near New York City
4
B O R O U G H 
J A I L S
(All but Staten Island)
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
reduce the jail population by as many as 2,000 people. Governor Hochul has increased investments 
in inpatient forensic psychiatric care and mobile mental health treatment teams, and NYC Health + 
Hospitals plans to open 100 transitional beds with wrap-around services for homeless people with 
serious mental illness and addiction issues.
Our Commission will support those leaders who take necessary, bold action to get the job done. 
We are confident our fellow New Yorkers will too. 
I.	
Dilapidated, dangerous, and inordinately expensive, the Rikers Island jail complex harms public 
safety, staff, and incarcerated people. Rikers must close. 
II.	 New York City law mandates Rikers close by August 31, 2027. To replace Rikers, NYC is building 
a borough-based system with 4,500 jail and secure treatment beds in City hospitals. That system 
promises to be safer, better delivery services, and save money. However, more specialized capacity  
is needed. 
	
To provide necessary elasticity, flexibility to best distribute people across the system, and ensure 
people get the care they need in an appropriate setting, especially people charged with crimes who 
are so severely mentally ill that they cannot comprehend what is happening in court, 500 new secure 
psychiatric treatment beds – outside the jails – are necessary. This would effectively expand the 
system that will replace Rikers to 5,000 beds. 
B L U E P R I N T  O U T L I N E

5
III.	 Despite the urgency of the situation, New York City will not meet the 2027 closure deadline,  
primarily becauase the borough-based system will not be ready. Still, NYC can build the jails at  
least a year faster than the City currently plans, speeding the closure of Rikers and easing the  
burden on local neighborhoods. 
	
Until an agreement can be reached between the City Council and the Administration on a path  
forward that assures progress toward closing Rikers on all necessary fronts, the law mandating  
closure by 2027 will – and should – remain in place. 
IV.	 The current jail population is over 6,800 people, including 440 women.4 Significant population 
reductions are necessary and possible as the jail population is artificially inflated beyond what is 
necessary to ensure public safety – and beyond the reasonable capacity of the borough-based  
system – due to two main factors:
	
A.	 Rikers is the second largest psychiatric facility in the United States; 57% of people there have a 
	
mental illness, including 1,400 people with a serious mental illness.
	
B.	 Criminal cases in NYC take far longer on average than they should to be resolved, keeping 
	
people at Rikers and victims waiting for answers and accountability. The average person at Rikers 
	
pretrial has been in jail for 269 days and counting waiting for their day in court.
V.	 Our Commission has long advocated for speeding up cases, both as a matter of justice and a means 
to safely reduce jail population. The New York State Office of Court Administration has answered the 
call and is undertaking serious, comprehensive case processing reforms that should speed up cases 
significantly. We project that within 3-5 years, faster cases can safely reduce the population by 1,200 
to 1,600 people (and conceivably up to 2,000 people). 
VI.	 To close Rikers, New York City – with assistance from New York State – must prioritize meeting 
the mental health and addiction treatment needs of people cycling into and out of jail, and, while 
protecting public safety, surgically ensure no one is jailed who could be safely supported in the 
community. It is clear from our research and data analysis that there are multiple paths to safely 
reduce the jail population and ensure we can close Rikers. The following investments should be 
prioritized and started to be phased in immediately. We project these investments and reforms will 
safely lower the jail population by roughly 750 people.   
	
A.	 Expand pre-trial electronic monitoring capacity, which New York City uses far less than 
	
surrounding counties, despite its efficacy. This capacity should be targeted at the population of 
	
people who, absent electronic monitoring, would otherwise be incarcerated.   
	
B.	 Expand Supervised Release’s Intensive Case Management pilot citywide to connect more 
	
people with serious mental illness and addiction issues with treatment, housing, and services, 
	
ensure they come to court, and head off the commission of more crimes.   
	
C.	 Expand Treatment Courts for people with serious mental illness and addiction issues, and 
	
increase access to those courts. 
	
D.	 Expand proven alternative to incarceration and re-entry programs, with a focus on mental illness, 
	
addiction, and preventing reoffending, alongside the expansion of transitional and supportive 
	
housing beds to which the City has already committed.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

6
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
	
E.	 Expand the 6-A Work Release Program to provide robust re-entry supervision and support for 
	
people serving city sentences (sentences of less than a year) and lower reoffending.
	
F.	 Open 500 secure forensic psychiatric treatment beds, outside the jails, primarily for people so 
	
severely mentally ill that they cannot comprehend what is happening in their cases. Ideally, 
	
the beds would be at a State facility in or near New York City. As mentioned, this will effectively 
	
expand the new system that will replace Rikers to 5,000 beds, provide the elasticity and flexibility 
	
the system needs, and ensure people get care in an appropriate setting. 
VII.	To create a safer, more sustainable system long-term, the City should phase in targeted investments 
to fill gaps in the continuum of treatment, specialized housing, and support that people with serious 
mental illness and addiction need to stabilize and avoid criminal activity in the first place and after 
release from jail. Those gaps mean that today, when such people are arrested, judges often have two 
very poor options: 1) releasing a person who needs treatment and stability without realistic options 
for either, and therefore taking an inordinate risk the person will reoffend; or 2) incapacitating that 
person in the chaos of Rikers, understanding they will likely exit in worse shape. 
	
A.	 Open 250 residential treatment beds in the community for people with serious mental illness 
	
and with co-occurring addictions, both for prevention and diversion from jail.
	
B.	 End waitlists for mobile mental health treatment teams.
SUMMARY OF JAIL POPULATION PROJECTIONS FOR 
IMMEDIATE PRIORITY REFORMS & INVESTMENTS
IMMEDIATE PRIORITY REFORMS & INVESTMENTS 
PROJECTED IMPACT
(# OF PEOPLE IN JAIL)
Meet mental health & addiction treatment needs of people cycling into jail; 
while protecting public safety, ensure no one is jailed who could be safely 
supported in the community
	
F Expand use of Electronic Monitoring 
	
F Expand Supervised Release Intensive Case Management Pilot citywide
	
F Expand Treatment Courts’ capacity & eligibility
	
F Expand use of proven Alternatives to Incarceration & Re-entry Programs
	
F Expand use of 6-A Work Release Program
750
Shorten Length of Jail Stays
	
F Faster criminal case processing 
	
F Speed up mental competency assessments (730 exams) & transfers to State  
hospitals for people found incompetent
1,550
TOTAL REDUCTION IN NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN JAIL
2,300
STARTING POPULATION
6,800 5
POST-REFORM & INVESTMENT JAIL POPULATION
4,500

7
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
	
C.	 Expand and strengthen supportive housing to stabilize and support people with serious mental 
	
illness, including by fully integrating evidence-based, community-focused supports, and 
	
behavioral health services.
	
D.	 Provide robust jail-based rehabilitative, educational, and re-entry programming for all  
	
incarcerated people.	
	
E. 	 Provide re-entry planning and access to services for the 74% of people at Rikers who return	
 
	
straight to our communities, with a special focus on people with serious mental illness and 
	
people who are receiving drug treatment, alongside the expansion of transitional and supportive 
	
housing beds to which the City has already committed. 
	
F.	 Grow the pipeline of future health care and correctional workers necessary to sufficiently staff the 
	
continuum of care and security we need. 
	
We project these investments will disproportionately benefit women, and along with OCA’s case 
processing reforms, allow the City to safely reduce the number of jail beds dedicated to women from 
450 to 250. The other 200 beds can be separated to house men. 
VIII. Department of Correction operations and culture must be revamped to improve safety for everyone 
in the jails, reduce deaths of incarcerated people, enhance service delivery, and end excessive 
violence and lawlessness. The work must begin immediately so today’s problems are not shifted to 
the borough-based system. Change must be pursued regardless of receivership. Any receiver must 
work to hasten Rikers’ closure. 
IX.	 Once opened, the safer, more efficient borough-based system, with 5,000 total beds, will save New 
York City $2.4 billion annually in operating and overtime costs. In contrast, the City will owe $1.24 
billion in annual bond payments for the system’s construction, a net savings of $1.2 billion annually 
once the new system is up and running.  
X.	 NYC should invest deeply in the neighborhoods housing the new borough jails, especially Chinatown 
and Mott Haven, including fulfilling the 2019 Points of Agreement.
XI.	 NYC should commit to transforming Rikers Island post-jails into a hub for essential yet  
difficult-to-site environmental infrastructure – a Renewable Rikers – which City feasibility studies 
confirm is the highest and best use of the land. Renewable Rikers would help relieve the South 
Bronx, Northern Queens, and Randalls Island from the burdens of foul sewage treatment plants 
and raw sewage pouring into waterfronts when it rains, allowing existing treatment plant sites to be 
reimagined, create hundreds of jobs, generate millions of dollars of business, save New York City  
$10 billion in operational and repair costs for existing aging infrastructure, and help NYC meet 
essential climate goals. Master planning should start now.  
XII.	Two Senior Point People must be appointed to lead the effort outlined here full-time: a full-time senior 
point person at City Hall whose sole mission is to close Rikers, and a full-time senior point person at 
DOC whose sole mission is preparing DOC to transition to the borough facilities.

RIKERS DATA 
SNAPSHOT
A MORE JUST NYC | INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
8

9
DEMOGRAPHICS
TOTAL JAIL POPULATION
6,811
100.0%
RACE/ETHNICITY
BLACK
3,885
57%
HISPANIC
2,105
30.9%
WHITE
563
8.3%
ASIAN
173
2.5%
ADDITIONAL RACE/ 
ETHNIC GROUP
22
0.3%
GENDER
WOMEN
440
6.5%
MEN
6,356
93.5%
AGE
AGES 24 AND UNDER
1,071
15.7%
AGES 25-54
4,716
69.2%
AGES 55 AND OLDER
1,018
15.0%
R I K E R S  P O P U L AT I O N  O N  F E B R U A R Y  2 3 ,  2 0 2 5
RIKERS DATA SNAPSHOT
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Source: Department of Correction via NYC Open Data (analyzed by the Data Collaborative for Justice).
MENTAL ILLNESS IN NYC JAIL 
POPULATION, FEBRUARY 23, 2025
RIKERS POPULATION BY
REASON FOR INCARCERATION
Mental Illness (57%)
Serious Mental  
Illness (21%)
No Mental Illness (43%)
Pretrial Detention (84%)
Jail Sentence (8%)
Parole Violation Due 
to New Charge (4%)
Technical Parole 
Violation (0.1%)
Additional Groups (4%)
Source: Department of Correction via NYC Open Data  
(analyzed by the Data Collaborative for Justice).
Source: Department of Correction via NYC Open Data (analyzed by the 
Data Collaborative for Justice); Correctional Health Services

10
Sources: Mayor's Office of Criminal Justice (Jail Population) and U.S. Census (General Population).
 Bronx               Brooklyn               Manhattan               Queens               Staten Island
COMPOSITION OF RIKERS POPULATION BY BOROUGH OF COURT CASE
NYC JAIL POPULATION
NYC GENERAL POPULATION
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
21%
27%
32%
19%
26%
31%
17%
16%
5%
6%
RIKERS DATA SNAPSHOT
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Source: Data Collaborative for Justice (analysis of Department of Correction data).
SEVERITY OF CHARGES FOR PEOPLE 
INCARCERATED PRETRIAL AT RIKERS
TOTAL PRETRIAL JAIL POPULATION
5,716
100.0%
CHARGE SEVERITY
MISDEMEANOR OR LESSER
288
5.1%
NONVIOLENT FELONY
1,208
21.1%
VIOLENT FELONY
4,220
73.8%

THE BLUEPRINT  
TO CLOSE RIKERS
A MORE JUST NYC | INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
11

12
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Rikers Must Close
I.

13
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
I. 
Throughout our renewed look at the plan to 
close Rikers, nothing was as crystal clear as the 
fact that the dilapidated, violent, chaotic Rikers 
Island jail complex fails in almost every respect. 
A clean break is necessary. Rikers must be 
closed. The reasons are many. 
Rikers is the second largest psychiatric facility in 
the United States.6 Almost 4,000 people, or 57% 
of the jail population, have a mental illness. 21%, 
or 1,400 people, have a serious mental illness, an 
increase of 30% since October 2019, when New 
York City enacted the plan to close Rikers into law.7 
Rikers and its staff are ill-equipped to provide 
consistent, adequate mental health treatment. 
Incarcerated people miss almost half their 
scheduled mental health appointments, most 
often because they are not brought to clinics by 
correction officers, but also because healthcare 
staff have to reschedule. Recent reports allege 
correction officers have been “deadlocking” 
severely mentally ill people, including some 
who are so ill they cannot comprehend what 
is happening in court, shutting them in their 
cells for days and weeks straight, often without 
access to medication or treatment.8 Health 
care staff reported seeing people profoundly 
decompensate, including smearing their cells  
with feces.9 
84% of people jailed on Rikers are held pre-
trial, yet they often sit in jail for months or years 
waiting for their day in court. 1,400 people have 
been in Rikers over a year pre-trial, including 500 
who have been jailed over two years.10 These 
delays also force crime victims to wait for answers 
and accountability.  
The Rikers jails are built mostly on decaying 
landfill. More than a century ago, New York City 
grew the island by six times its original size 
to its current 413 acres, primarily by dumping 
trash in the shallow waters around the original 
bedrock. As the garbage beneath many of the 
jails decomposes, the ground shifts and sinks. 
Foundations crack. Sewage pipes leak.  
Methane seeps into the facilities. Staff have 
reported concerns about cancer clusters  
among long-term workers. 
The poorly designed jails are plagued by 
terrible sightlines, blind spots, and very long 
corridors. These layouts pose a threat to staff 
and incarcerated people, and require significant 
additional staff to try to maintain safety. Despite 
investments in recent years, hundreds of cell 
doors still do not lock properly. Rusted metal and 
broken plexiglass from the dilapidated buildings 
are easily fashioned into weapons. The jails lack 
adequate space for counseling and rehabilitative 
programming. Some jails have inadequate fire 
safety systems.  
Rikers’ impact and its neglect for decades have 
been disproportionately felt. 85% of uniformed 
staff are Black or Latino. 88% of incarcerated 
people are also Black or Latino. 
Violence is a constant threat,11 responded to 
erratically, if any consequences are imposed 
at all. Stabbings and slashings occur almost 
daily.12 Drugs are easily obtained. A sense of 
lawlessness pervades. Since 2020, 61 people 
have died at Rikers or very shortly after  
being released from custody, many by  
suicide or overdose.13 
Incarcerated people have little to do all day as 
only limited programming is offered, leading 
to frustration, anger, and violence – often with 
little consequence.14 
Dilapidated, dangerous, and inordinately expensive, the Rikers  
Island jail complex harms public safety, staff, and incarcerated  
people. Rikers must close. 
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

14
Because Rikers is isolated, difficult to reach, 
and sprawling, it can take family members and 
lawyers 6 to 8 hours just to visit someone for 
30 minutes. When people cannot dedicate 
this much time, family ties and lawyer-client 
relationships fray, and frustration builds. 
In 2024, the Department of Correction (DOC) 
spent over $30 million to bus people to over 
160,000 court dates in borough courthouses.15 
Incarcerated people are routinely woken before 
sunrise for such trips, and can spend hours in 
courthouse holding pens waiting for what are 
often perfunctory appearances.16 Many return  
to Rikers late in the day, exhausted, hungry,  
and frustrated; short tempers can trigger 
violence. DOC also struggles to get people 
routinely from Rikers to medical appointments 
and treatment in the boroughs, when the care  
is not available on Rikers.
Officers and civilian staff are asked to grapple 
with an incredibly challenging population 
without adequate support, training, or tools. 
Due in part to mismanagement, many staff work 
grueling hours, including mandatory overtime.17 
There are not enough captains to properly 
supervise correction officers. Not enough staff 
are assigned to steady posts on steady teams. 
Staff are harassed and assaulted by incarcerated 
people, often with few repercussions. For 
instance, someone who harms an officer can 
remain on the same housing unit, requiring the 
officer to see the person day in and day out. In 
turn, discipline of staff who commit misconduct 
or use excessive force is haphazard and 
frequently delayed, if it occurs at all. Discipline – 
or lack thereof – varies significantly between  
the different jails. 
DOC recruitment is vastly outpaced by attrition. 
The best recruiters to the job used to be staff 
themselves bringing in their families and friends. 
Many fewer recommend working for DOC today. 
A significant number of staff told us they no 
longer see Rikers as a place to make a career. 
Between January 2022 and October 2024, 
2,325 officers left the Department, while 557 
officers graduated from the academy.18 262 of 
those new officers left within two years.19 262 of 
those new officers left within two years. While 
around 100 new officers will shortly graduate 
from the Correction academy, approximately 
1,500 officers will become eligible for retirement 
by the end of 2026.20   
Three-quarters of incarcerated people return 
straight from the chaos of Rikers to our 
communities,21 often worse off than when they 
went to jail. Inadequate re-entry planning and 
services compound the damage from Rikers.22 
This leads to reoffending: 1/3 of people are 
reincarcerated at Rikers within a year, and has a 
destabilizing effect on families and communities. 
All this costs New York City taxpayers over 
$400,000 per incarcerated person per year.23  
It is hard to imagine a worse investment. 
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Source: Ted Shaffrey/AP

THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
NYC Must Move to a Safer  
Borough-Based System, and Add  
500 Secure Psychiatric Treatment  
Beds – Outside the Jails
15
II.

16
In 2019, New York City adopted a plan to close 
Rikers and replace it with four modern jails in 
the boroughs – one in every borough but Staten 
Island – and a pioneering model of secure 
treatment beds at three Health + Hospitals 
facilities – Bellevue, Woodhull, and  
North-Central Bronx Hospitals – known as 
outposted therapeutic housing units. 
Alongside this plan, New York City enacted 
legislation and zoning changes mandating 
that the Rikers jails close completely by August 
31, 2027. After that date, it will be illegal to 
incarcerate anyone on Rikers. 
By agreeing to close Rikers, the City answered 
the calls of formerly incarcerated people, their 
families, people who have worked on Rikers, 
prosecutors, judges, faith & community leaders,  
and countless others, including our late member, 
Herb Sturz, who first proposed shifting from 
Rikers to borough-based jails decades earlier. 
The City also recognized that per the NYC 
Department of Design and Construction, 
rebuilding the decrepit jails on Rikers would 
cost 8%-15% more than building borough-based 
jails, and would take years longer.24 This is due 
to: necessary environmental remediation and 
landfill stabilization; the island’s isolation and 
single bridge on and off; and the presence 
of active jails, which would limit construction 
hours and require a staggered schedule to 
maintain sufficient capacity during construction. 
Construction on Rikers would also continue the 
negative impacts of Rikers’ isolation, bring none 
of the benefits of the borough-based system, 
and end the prospect of Renewable Rikers.  
II. New York City law mandates Rikers close by August 31, 2027. 
To replace Rikers, NYC is building a borough-based system with 
4,500 jail and secure treatment beds in City hospitals. That system 
will be safer, better delivery services, and save money. However, 
more specialized capacity is needed.
To provide the system with necessary elasticity and flexibility to 
best distribute people, and ensure people get the care they need 
in an appropriate setting, especially people charged with crimes 
who are so severely mentally ill that they cannot comprehend 
what is happening in court. 500 new secure psychiatric treatment 
beds – outside the jails – are necessary. This would effectively 
expand the total system that will replace Rikers to to 5,000 beds. 
A.
B.
NYC’s Original 2019 Plan to Close Rikers
NYC’s Current Facilities Plan to Replace Rikers
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
The City’s current plan calls for 4,500 total beds: 
4,160 jail beds in four 1,040 bed facilities, one 
each in Manhattan, the Bronx, Brooklyn, and 
Queens.25 Given the need for operational and 
security flexibility, sound correctional practice 
dictates that 4,500 correctional beds reasonably 
hold no more than 4,100 to 4,200 people at  
any one time.  

17
Since the City first agreed to close Rikers in 2017 
and replace it with a borough-based system, the 
planned capacity of the system and projected 
population have changed considerably in 
reaction to State laws (primarily bail reform and 
the Less Is More Act), post-COVID crime rates, 
and other policy shifts and choices that have 
impacted the size of the jail population. 
In 2018, the de Blasio Administration proposed 
a closure plan with 6,000 jail beds for 5,000 
people.28 In September 2019, the Administration 
reduced that to 4,000 people, based on 
expectations surrounding bail reform legislation 
passed earlier that year and a consistent pattern 
of jail population reduction over the preceding 
decades. Indeed, from the early 1990s until 
2019, New York City simultaneously reduced 
crime and incarceration by roughly 70%. This 
success was built on a range of advances, from 
focused policing, to developing some of the best 
diversion programs in the country, to improving 
public space.29  
The plan adopted in October 2019 was smaller 
still, in significant part to meet neighborhood 
demands that the jails be smaller and as a result 
of additional investments in supervised release 
to bolster bail reform: 3,544 jail beds and 250 
outposted beds, which combined were to house 
no more than 3,300 people, a number which has 
proven unrealistic in the timeframe required for 
the closure of Rikers Island.30  
COVID deeply disrupted the crime and 
incarceration trajectory of the prior three 
decades in New York City, and laid bare major 
gaps, especially around mental illness. At the 
same time, the legal landscape shifted. In 2020, 
C. Changes in Jail Population and Planned Jail Capacity Since 2017
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Three of the jails are being built on the footprint 
of long-standing, but dilapidated jails next door 
to courthouses. The fourth, in the Bronx, is going 
up on the site of an NYPD tow pound.26 20% 
of the jail beds, or roughly 830 beds, will be 
“therapeutic,” dedicated to people with serious 
mental illnesses, physical illnesses, addiction 
treatment needs, and intellectual and other 
developmental disabilities.27  
Under the plan, all incarcerated women will be 
housed in the Queens facility, separate from 
men. The City is planning 450 beds for women. 
There will also be approximately 360 total 
outposted therapeutic housing units at NYC 
Health + Hospitals sites, including 104 beds at 
Bellevue, approximately 100 at North-Central 
Bronx, and about 155 at Woodhull Hospital. 
These beds will provide people with serious 
physical illnesses access to specialty care 
available only in hospitals, like cancer treatment 
and dialysis. Today, those people must be 
regularly bussed back and forth from Rikers; 
however, between October and December 2024, 
Correctional Health Services reports that only 
38% of people were seen as scheduled at  
off-island specialty clinics. 37% were not 
produced by DOC. A portion of the outposted 
units will also provide treatment for people  
with serious mental illness. 
The new jails and outposted therapeutic are 
being designed to be safer and to increase 
service delivery. They will have clear sightlines, 
smaller housing units, centralized officer stations 
to permit direct supervision, more space for 
rehabilitative programming, education, and 
health care, staff break rooms, natural light, and 
direct access to recreation areas – all lacking 
on Rikers. Proximity to courts will allow easier 
production of people to hearings, helping cut 
time in jail and reduce the jail population. More 
central locations with solid public transit links 
will facilitate visits from families, attorneys, 
service providers, clergy, and volunteers. 

18
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
bail reform went into effect, then has been 
amended multiple times.31 In September 2021, 
Governor Hochul signed the Less Is More Act 
into law, which significantly altered the use  
of incarceration to respond to alleged  
technical violations of parole rules.32 Both 
reforms significantly reduced segments of  
the incarcerated population, as discussed in  
the endnotes. 
When COVID struck in March 2020, stakeholders 
worked closely together to rapidly reduce the jail 
population for health safety reasons, reaching a 
low not seen in decades: 3,809 people on April 
29, 2020. Soon after, the jail population began 
to rise. By February 2022, it was 5,700. Today, it 
stands over 6,800, a level that must be reduced.
Starting in 2020, every major category of crime 
rose in New York City, as did arrests, including 
for lower-level offenses.33 However, since 
the summer of 2024, major crime has been 
decreasing steadily and significantly.34 Today, it 
stands only 2.5% higher than it was in February 
2020.35 The jail population, in contrast, has yet 
to plateau or decline, driven by an increase in jail 
admissions and inordinately long pretrial stays. 
CHANGE IN MAJOR CRIMES, AVERAGE DAILY JAIL 
POPULATION & JAIL ADMISSIONS, 2005-2025
16,000
14,000
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
Avg. monthly major crimes
ADP
Avg monthly admissions
2005
2012
2019
2006
2013
2020
2007
2014
2021
2008
2015
2022
2009
2016
2023
2010
2017
2024
2011
2018
2025*
After increasing between 2020 and 2022, major 
crimes have dropped and through Feb. 2025 are now 
only 2.5% higher than Feb. 2020, yet the average daily 
jail population (ADP) is 25% higher than Feb. 2020. 
Jail admissions have steadily increased since 2020.
* 2025 data through end of February. 
Sources: NYC Mayor’s Office of Criminal Justice, Summary Data File, Crime, available at https://criminaljustice.cityofnewyork.us/wp-content/up-
loads/2025/02/Crime_thruJan2025.xlsx; NYPD Press Release, NYPD announces crime continues to decline in February 2025, shatters 30-year 
shooting record (March 3, 2025), available at https://www.nyc.gov/site/nypd/news/pr535/nypd-crime-continues-decline-february-2025-shatters-30-
year-shooting-record; Data Collaborative for Justice, New York City Jail Population Tracker, available at https://nyc-jail-population-tracker.datacollabo-
rativeforjustice.org/; Vera Institute of Justice, New York Criminal Legal System Data Hub – Jail, available at https://www.vera.org/ny-data-hub/Jail#top; 
Data Collaborative for Justice, New York City Jail Population Tracker, available at https://nyc-jail-population-tracker.datacollaborativeforjustice.org/; 
NYC Department of Correction, DOC Data Dashboard (visited Feb. 20, 2025).

19
Sources: Data Collaborative for Justice, New York City Jail Population Tracker, available at https://nyc-jail-population-tracker.datacollaborativeforjustice.
org/; Vera Institute of Justice, New York Criminal Legal System Data Hub – Jail, available at https://www.vera.org/ny-data-hub/Jail#top.
Since February 2020, the makeup of the jail population has changed significantly, with major increases in the pretrial population, and 
increases in the prevalence of mental illness generally and serious mental illness in particular. 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
REASONS FOR INCERCERATION: 
FEBRUARY 2020 (5,454 PEOPLE) VS. FEBRUARY 2025 (6,811)
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
3,255
5,848
576
531
814
286
656
4
153
142
PRETRIAL
2/20
PRETRIAL
2/25
JAIL
SENTENCE
2/20
JAIL
SENTENCE
2/25
PAROLE
VIOLATION
+ NEW
CHARGE
2/20
PAROLE
VIOLATION
+ NEW
CHARGE
2/25
TECHNICAL
PAROLE
VIOLATION
2/20
TECHNICAL
PAROLE
VIOLATION
2/25
OTHER
2/20
OTHER
2/25
JAIL POPULATION BY MENTAL ILLNESS, 
FEBRUARY 2020 VS. FEBRUARY 2025
6,000
7,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
5,454
6,811
2,382
3,873
820*
1,400*
3,067
2,888
JAIL 
POPULATION
2/20
JAIL 
POPULATION
2/25
MENTAL 
ILLNESS
2/20
MENTAL 
ILLNESS
2/25
SERIOUS 
MENTAL 
ILLNESS
2/20
SERIOUS 
MENTAL 
ILLNESS
2/25
NO MENTAL 
ILLNESS
2/20
NO MENTAL 
ILLNESS
2/25
*Serious mental illness included within mental illness category. 
Sources: Data Collaborative for Justice, New York City Jail Population Tracker, available at https://nyc-jail-population-tracker.datacollaborativeforjustice.
org/; Correctional Health Services, CHS Patient Profile for Individuals in the New York City Jail System (December 2024), available at https://hhinternet.blob.
core.windows.net/uploads/2025/01/correctional-health-services-patient-profile-metrics-december-2024.pdf (reporting 21% of jail population has a serious 
mental illness); NYC Mayor’s Management Report Preliminary Fiscal 2020 (Jan. 2020), available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/
pdf/pmmr2020/2020_pmmr.pdf (reporting 15% of jail population has a serious mental illness); NYC Mayor’s Management Report (Sep. 2020), available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/pdf/mmr2020/2020_mmr.pdf (reporting 15% of jail population has a serious mental illness). 
2/20
2/20
2/25
2/25

20
A little over a year ago, the Adams Administration 
officially added 600 jail beds to the borough-
based plan, 150 at each of the four jails. As the 
footprint of the buildings could not legally be 
expanded, the Administration made space by 
cutting over 500 therapeutic beds in the jails. 
In addition, some of the remaining therapeutic 
units will now be double-tiered, which is not 
considered best practice for that type of unit. 
The Administration also increased the number 
of beds for women from 126 to 450, all at the 
Queens jail (reducing the number of men’s beds 
in Queens commensurately). Meanwhile, design 
changes at the request of the Department of 
Correction and correction unions have shrunk 
available space in the outposted therapeutic 
housing units, leading to a 10% cut in the number 
of those hospital-based beds.36 The end result 
is a plan to build 4,160 jail beds and around 360 
secure treatment beds in City hospitals.
O R I G I N A L  N E W  Y O R K  C I T Y  
F A C I L I T I E S  P L A N ,  2 0 1 9 - 2 0 2 2
C U R R E N T  N E W  Y O R K  C I T Y  
F A C I L I T I E S  P L A N ,  2 0 2 3 - P R E S E N T
3,944
4,520
394
∼360
886
1,040
45%
20%
126
450
114
104
160
∼150
120
∼105
4
4
3,300
4,200
T O TA L  B E D S
T O TA L  B E D S
S E C U R E 
H O S P I TA L  
B E D S
S E C U R E 
H O S P I TA L  
B E D S
B E D S  I N  E A C H
B E D S  I N  E A C H
T H E R A P U T I C  B E D S 
I N  E A C H  J A I L
T H E R A P U T I C  B E D S 
I N  E A C H  J A I L
B E D S  F O R  W O M E N  
I N  Q U E E N S  J A I L
B E D S  F O R  W O M E N 
I N  Q U E E N S  J A I L
B E D S  I N  B E L L E V U E
B E D S  I N  B E L L E V U E
B E D S  I N  W O O D H U L L
B E D S  I N  W O O D H U L L
B E D S  I N  N O R T H - 
C E N T R A L  B R O N X
B E D S  I N  N O R T H - 
C E N T R A L  B R O N X
P R O J E C T E D  J A I L 
P O P U L AT I O N
P R O J E C T E D  J A I L 
P O P U L AT I O N 37
B O R O U G H 
J A I L S
B O R O U G H 
J A I L S
All but  
Staten Island
All but  
Staten Island
(3,544 total)
(4,160 total)
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
B O R O U G H - B A S E D  F A C I L I T Y  P L A N S

21
Construction costs for this new system have 
risen significantly since 2019, reflecting post-
COVID construction inflation in New York City, 
from an estimated $8.7 billion to $15.5 billion.38 
The City has commendably allocated additional 
capital funds and secured additional borrowing 
capacity from Albany to cover this rise in costs. 
The path since the passage of the plan to close 
Rikers in 2019 has been complicated and often 
filled with disappointments and delays that in 
many regards were avoidable. Multiple factors 
have played a role, both within the control of 
elected officials, and not. We must continue to 
publicly build out an in-depth historical record 
of what led us to today, including to help 
current and future leaders learn from missed 
opportunities and failures of attention, focus, 
and will that have resulted in a plan that is 
significantly behind schedule and has many 
more people in jail than is necessary for public 
safety. What is clear is that when there has 
been appropriate political and policy support, 
and focus on implementation, the plan has and 
will continue to move forward. The hallmarks of 
leadership from here on out must be urgency 
and prioritization with a clear North Star: close 
the jails on Rikers forever as soon as possible. 
Our Commission analyzed various investments 
and reforms proven to improve individual 
outcomes and reduce reoffending, including 
suggested improvements. We estimated the 
impact the investments and reforms would have 
on the jail population, exploring both full and 
partial implementation scenarios. It came clear 
to us that a range of combinations of those 
steps can help New York City safely and smartly 
improve outcomes, increase public safety, and 
reduce the jail population. We discuss in the body 
of the report the steps we believe elected officials 
and stakeholders should prioritize. Additional 
opportunities are listed in Appendix A.39 
Overall, we project that thanks to just-begun 
case processing reforms by the Office of Court 
Administration and targeted investments 
focused on serious mental illness, addiction, 
and reoffending – discussed in detail below 
– the New York City jail population will be 
approximately 4,500 people.40 
Our projections are based on our best efforts 
to conservatively model the impact of these 
strategies, guided by available historical 
and current data, but we caution that actual 
outcomes will depend heavily on funding and 
implementation. Furthermore, our estimates 
should be reassessed regularly as the reforms 
take hold and investments are phased in over 
time. Appendix B provides more detail on our 
projections and the underlying data. 
None of this is guaranteed. We freely admit that 
our projections are both science and art; the best 
educated guesses we can make under current 
circumstances. It is clear from experience that 
properly funded, properly staffed interventions 
with reasonable caseloads can make real 
progress. Returns on these investments should 
be incremental, but should be compounding.  
For instance, the more engagement, treatment, 
and housing opportunities there are for people 
who cycle in and out of Rikers – especially if  
they extend beyond the life of a person’s  
criminal case – the more likely years of distrust 
and calcified complexities will be broken down, 
and the less frequently people will commit  
crimes and return to jail. 
Equally, if stakeholders and leaders do and 
invest too little, not only will New York City 
be less safe, but the jail population will also 
decline less. The steps we lay out in this 
report require strong, persistent leadership 
and attention by whatever set of leaders are 
in office in New York City over the next several 
D. Independent Rikers Commission’s Population Projections 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

22
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
E. Need for Additional, Specialized Capacity Outside the Jails
4,500 people would fill 100% of the capacity 
of the City’s planned borough-based system. 
While that might permit Rikers to close, it is 
not a sustainable population, as it denies DOC 
the ability to move people easily for security or 
programmatic purposes. It also fails to provide 
any leeway should the population rise for 
unforeseen reasons, nor will it ensure people 
get the care they need in an appropriate setting, 
especially people charged with crimes who 
are so severely mentally ill that they cannot 
comprehend what is happening in court. In 
2024, almost 700 such people were in Rikers.41 
Therefore, we propose that the system be 
expanded from 4,500 beds to 5,000 beds 
overall by adding 500 secure forensic 
psychiatric treatment beds, primarily for people 
who are so severely mentally ill that they 
cannot comprehend what is happening in court. 
These beds should be healthcare-focused beds, 
outside the jails. 
Ideally, they would be located at a State 
facility in or near New York City. While we are 
recommending a State facility as the most 
feasible site for these beds, the City and State 
years. Closing Rikers must be a top priority, with 
keen attention to the various strands of policy 
and action that will make that possible. The 
harm Rikers visits upon New Yorkers within its 
walls and outside them is too great to allow for 
drift or anything less than a laser-like focus on 
its complete closure and elimination.
SUMMARY OF JAIL POPULATION PROJECTIONS FOR 
IMMEDIATE PRIORITY REFORMS & INVESTMENTS
IMMEDIATE PRIORITY REFORMS & INVESTMENTS 
PROJECTED IMPACT
(# OF PEOPLE IN JAIL)
Meet mental health & addiction treatment needs of people cycling into jail; 
while protecting public safety, ensure no one is jailed who could be safely 
supported in the community
	
F Expand use of Electronic Monitoring 
	
F Expand Supervised Release Intensive Case Management Pilot citywide
	
F Expand Treatment Courts’ capacity & eligibility
	
F Expand use of proven Alternatives to Incarceration & Re-entry Programs
	
F Expand use of 6-A Work Release Program
750
Shorten Length of Jail Stays
	
F Faster criminal case processing 
	
F Speed up mental competency assessments (730 exams) & transfers to State  
hospitals for people found incompetent
1,550
TOTAL REDUCTION IN NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN JAIL
2,300
STARTING POPULATION
6,800 5
POST-REFORM & INVESTMENT JAIL POPULATION
4,500

23
F. Fewer Jail Beds Will Be Needed for Women
All incarcerated women will be housed at 
the Queens facility. Originally, that jail was 
slated to have 126 beds dedicated to women. 
Mayor Adams increased that number to 
450 (reducing the number of men’s beds in 
Queens commensurately). There are 430 
women incarcerated on Rikers today, 83% 
with a mental illness and 35% with a serious 
mental illness. We project that with the reforms 
and targeted investments outlined below, 
combined with the our Commission’s gender-
specific recommendations from 2021, it is 
very reasonable to forecast that  225 women 
would remain.42 Therefore, the City could cut 
the number of planned jail beds for women 
to about 250, while maintaining operational 
flexibility. The excess space created could be 
redesigned or otherwise separated to house 
men, as needed. 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
I N D E P E N D E N T  R I K E R S  C O M M I S S I O N ’ S  F A C I L I T I E S  P L A N
5,000
∼360
500
1,040
250
4,500
T O TA L  B E D S
S E C U R E 
H O S P I TA L  B E D S
S E C U R E  
F O R E N S I C 
P S Y C H I AT R I C 
T R E AT M E N T 
B E D S
B E D S  I N  E A C H
B E D S  F O R  W O M E N 
I N  Q U E E N S  J A I L
104
∼150
∼105
B E D S  I N  B E L L E V U E
B E D S  I N  W O O D H U L L
B E D S  I N  N O R T H - 
C E N T R A L  B R O N X
P R O J E C T E D  J A I L 
P O P U L AT I O N
(4,160 total)
Ideally at a State facility  
in or near New York City
4
B O R O U G H 
J A I L S
(All but Staten Island)
should work together to develop an operational 
and staffing plan, including consideration of 
legal requirements for the population housed 
within and supporting any necessary policy 
change as required.    

THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Despite Urgency, Borough-Based 
Facilities Are Delayed & Must Be  
Sped Up
24
III.

25
To our deep disappointment, and despite the 
urgency, New York City cannot reasonably meet  
the 2027 closure deadline: while construction on 
the borough-based jails and hospital-based beds 
is proceeding, every facility is significantly 
behind schedule. 
Even so, until an agreement can be 
reached between the City Council and the 
Administration on a path forward that assures 
progress toward closing Rikers on all necessary 
fronts, the law mandating closure will – and 
should – remain in place.43  
III. Despite the urgency of the present situation, New York City will  
not meet the 2027 closure deadline, primarily because the  
borough-based system will not be ready. Still, NYC can build the 
jails at least a year faster than the city currently plans, speeding the 
closure of Rikers and easing the burden on local neighborhoods. 
The Brooklyn jail is slated for completion in 2029, 
the Bronx in 2031, and Queens and Manhattan 
in 2032. Our Commission has strongly urged the 
City to do all it can to safely speed up the projects, 
notwithstanding the challenges COVID and market 
conditions have wrought. The longer construction 
lasts, the longer Rikers stays open, and the greater 
the burden on the neighborhoods around the jails. 
Two key opportunities remain to be fully seized 
that could speed up the jails construction by  
at least one year. 
Per the Department of Design and Construction, 
the City could speed up jail construction by 
around one year if it took full advantage of the  
design-build process being used. Under design-
build, architects and construction firms work as 
a unit from the start of a project. On other local 
design-build projects, such as those run by the 
Port Authority, that team approach allows work 
on foundations and building exteriors to begin 
even while interior designs are being finalized. 
But as the jails are the first major City project 
using design-build, the City has decided to 
finish all design work, inside and out, before any 
construction takes place.44 That decision adds 
roughly one year to the timeline for each jail 
(though we are pleased that there is now some 
simultaneous construction occurring in Brooklyn). 
Following the Port Authority model (ideally, with 
the Port Authority’s guidance) might add some 
financial risk for the City, but the risk of keeping 
Rikers open for an additional year is greater still. 
Furthermore, given the phased construction of 
the four jails, lessons learned from the Brooklyn 
jail, which is the furthest along, can be used to 
mitigate risk and speed construction for the other 
three jails.  
The jails can also likely also be further sped up 
by using a process called value engineering, 
which has been used for decades by the NYC 
Office of Management and Budget for large, 
complicated construction projects. Under value 
engineering, the City would engage outside 
experts to conduct a top-to-bottom review of 
construction, timeline, and program plans for the 
new facilities. Value engineering has reduced 
construction costs by up to 15% on other projects 
and shaved months off the completion dates. 
After our Commission’s repeated requests, the 
Department of Design and Construction has told 
us that value engineering will be used for the 
Manhattan jail.45
A. Jail Delays and Opportunity to Speed Up Construction by At Least a Year
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

26
The three sets of outposted therapeutic housing 
beds were all originally meant to have been 
completed by 2024. Construction on the first 
set of about 100 beds at Bellevue has just been 
finished, two years later than initially expected. 
Woodhull and North-Central Bronx Hospitals 
likely will not be ready until 2028. 
Our Commission is deeply concerned that to 
date, the Department of Correction has yet to  
commit the staff necessary to open the Bellevue 
beds, contending the personnel are needed on 
Rikers.46 This threatens to keep some of the most 
ill people in Rikers distant from the specialized 
care they routinely need – and to continue to 
significantly burden jail-based staff with having to 
transport people back and forth to the hospital. 
We urge the Department to immediately 
reorganize staff as necessary to ensure the 
Bellevue outposted units open within the next 
few months, after correctional and health care 
staff have had the opportunity to properly train  
together on the new units. 
As each new borough-based facility opens, 
proportionate space on Rikers should be 
permanently shuttered, decommissioned, and 
transferred to the Department of Citywide 
Administrative Services, as required pursuant to 
the Renewable Rikers Act.
B. Outposted Therapeutic Housing Unit Delays and Necessity to Staff Up Quickly
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Bellevue Outposted Therapeutic Housing Units' Outdoor Recreation Area
Source: Bellevue Community Advisory Board

THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
NYC Jail Population is Artificially 
Inflated Above What’s Necessary  
for Safety
27
IV.

28
IV. The current jail population is over 6,800 people, including 440 
women. Significant population reductions are necessary and 
possible as the jail population is artificially inflated beyond what 
is necessary to ensure public safety – and beyond the reasonable 
capacity of the borough-based system.
Jail should be a last resort, and no one should 
be in jail a day longer than necessary. That is not 
true of incarceration in Rikers today. Instead, the 
Rikers population is artificially inflated above 
what is necessary for public safety by two main 
factors: the number of people incarcerated 
with serious mental illness and the inordinate 
amount of time it often takes to resolve 
people’s cases. The result is a population of over 
6,800 people, significantly more than would 
reasonably fit in the new borough-based system. 
The population is up 525 people from 1 year 
ago (465 of them pretrial and 56 serving a City 
sentence), and up 835 people from 2 years 
ago (672 of them pretrial and 74 serving a City 
sentence).47 That rise is deeply concerning for 
many reasons, including the tremendous strain  
it puts on jail staff, service delivery, and 
treatment at Rikers. 
With insufficient treatment options for mental 
illness in the community, and more people 
needing those services post-COVID, people with 
serious mental illness are more likely to become 
destabilized, which can lead to criminal activity 
and arrest. Judges and district attorneys have 
repeatedly told us they often feel faced with two 
very poor options: 1) releasing someone with 
serious mental illness who needs treatment and 
stability without realistic options for either, and 
therefore taking an inordinate risk the person 
will re-offend; or 2) incapacitating that person 
in the chaos of Rikers, understanding they will 
likely exit in worse shape. 
The end result is that Rikers is the second 
largest psychiatric facility in the United States. 
57% of people at Rikers have a mental illness, 
including 83% of incarcerated women. 21% have 
a serious mental illness (1,400 people), including 
35% of women.48 In 2023, over 600 people at 
Rikers were so severely mentally ill that they 
could not comprehend what was happening in 
their criminal case or assist in their defense.49 
84% of people at Rikers are held pre-trial, 
waiting for their day in court. Once locked up, 
their cases too often crawl along. These case 
delays do more than bloat the jail population. 
They also force crime victims to wait inordinately 
for answers and accountability. 
Recent history shows us that safe, smart 
population reduction is possible when it is made 
a priority by the City and other stakeholders, with 
sustained, focused attention on making it a reality. 
Now is the time to double-down on what worked 
for many years, adapted and improved to meet 
our current realities, and to fill those gaps. 
On the following pages, we present a path to 
reducing the jail population that will enable us 
to close Rikers and, beyond that, contribute to 
a fairer, safer NYC over the long term. Special 
attention should be paid to women and gender 
non-conforming people, who make up 6% of 
the jail population, and have unique needs. Our 
2022 report, A Path to Under 100, outlines our 
recommendations specific to them, which we 
reiterate here. 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Safely Right-size Jail Population, Part 
1: NYS Office of Court Administration 
Initiative to Speed Up Criminal Cases
29
V.

30
V. Our Commission has long advocated for speeding up cases, both 
as a matter of justice and a means to safely reduce jail population. 
The New York State Office of Court Administration has answered 
the call and is undertaking serious, comprehensive case processing 
reforms that should speed up cases significantly. We project that 
within 3-5 years, faster cases can safely reduce the population by 
1,200 to 1,600 people (and conceivably up to 2,000 people). 
Since our first report in 2017, our Commission 
has called out the major negative impact that 
criminal case delays have on Rikers and the 
administration of justice. The average criminal 
case for someone locked up at Rikers takes 
an unacceptably long time to resolve. As of 
February 23, 2025, the average person being 
held pre-trial had been at Rikers for 269 days 
and counting50 Over 1,400 people at Rikers have 
been jailed pre-trial for more than a year (65% 
with a mental illness). 500 of those people have 
been jailed pretrial for over two years (70% with 
a mental illness), and almost 200 for more than 
three years (71% with a mental illness).51 People 
with mental illness stay 70% longer on average 
than people without.52  
Even before COVID, indicted felony cases took 
almost 50% longer in New York City than the 
rest of New York State.53 COVID made things 
dramatically worse, particularly for people 
facing violent felony charges (now 69% of the 
jail population), as seen in the following chart. 
COVID forced courts to shut down entirely, then 
operate at reduced capacity for an extended 
period, including just a handful of trials between 
2020-2022. While with the exception of murder 
cases, courts in NYC have dealt with the COVID 
backlog, COVID-era court personnel vacancies, 
from clerks, to court reporters, to court officers, 
further hinder case processing. 
AVERAGE DAYS IN CUSTODY: PEOPLE HELD PRETRIAL 
IN NYC JAILS, PRE- AND POST-PANDEMIC
Source: Data Collaborative for Justice (analysis of Department of Correction Data)
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
MISDEMEANOR 
OR LESSER
NONVIOLENT 
FELONY
VIOLENT FELONY: 
NOT MURDER
MURDER
ALL PRETRIAL 
CASES
143
182
216
277
199
138
203
64
164
450
549 524
273
351
269
March 18, 2020 
(Pre-COVID  
Baseline)
December 1, 2021 
(Pandemic  
Backlog Peak)
February 23, 2025 
(Status Quo)
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

31
The New York State Office of Court 
Administration (OCA), under the leadership 
of Chief Judge Rowan Wilson and Chief 
Administrative Judge Joseph Zayas, has 
laudably answered the call. OCA has begun 
a comprehensive revamp of criminal case 
processing for people in NYC jails. This includes 
establishing clear case schedules, meeting with 
both sides between key court dates to ensure 
progress, and setting firm trial dates. While 
prior OCA leaders established pilot projects 
or tackled backlogs and major case delays in 
certain boroughs, this is the most far-reaching 
plan in court history and Chief Judge Wilson and 
Judge Zayas deserve enormous credit for the 
first top-to-bottom, citywide initiative aiming to 
permanently change how cases operate.  
We project that moving cases to their natural 
conclusions at more reasonable speeds will 
result in 1,200 to 1,600 fewer people will be  
in jail, and conceivably as many as 2,000  
fewer people. 
Our projections are based on the courts on 
average shortening the longest cases to 
appropriate goals. Hitting the following goals 
would mean almost 1,400 fewer people in jail on 
any given day, while increasing procedural justice: 
	
F Misdemeanor charges: average of 90 
days (for cases taking over 90 days now);  
~190 beds saved
	
F Non-violent felony charges: average of 180 
days (for cases taking over 180 days now);  
~300 beds saved
	
F Violent, non-homicide felony charges: 
average of 365 days (for cases taking  
over 365 days now); ~570 beds saved
	
F Homicide charges: average of 730 days  
(for cases taking over 730 days now);  
~310 beds saved
Goals like this are in line with those proposed 
by the National Center for State Courts, which 
calls for resolving 75 percent of indicted 
felonies within 90 days, 90 percent within 
180 days (New York’s official standard), and 98 
percent within one year. The New York City 
Comptroller’s office estimated that applying 
those standards could reduce the jail population 
by around 1,700 people on any given day. 
These goals should be able to be met even if 
the discovery statute is amended, as Governor 
Hochul has proposed.
Our confidence in the OCA initiative’s likely 
success is due in part to the strong performance 
of a case processing pilot project by the Center 
for Justice Innovation in 2019 in Brooklyn, 
which instituted some of the same steps being 
implemented today. Though the pilot project was 
less comprehensive in approach and available 
personnel than OCA’s current initiative, it still 
managed to increase the number of felony cases 
resolved within 180 days by 70% for people in 
jail.54 If even that more limited 2019 pilot were 
expanded citywide, we project it would reduce 
the jail population by over 900 people.
The ability of the OCA initiative to reach its 
maximum potential depends on relevant 
stakeholders’ full cooperation. This includes: 
	
F The NYC Police Department fully staffing its 
discovery liaison units, which work to ensure 
police timely hand over all required evidence 
to prosecutors, while easing the burden on 
beat officers and detectives. Legislation like 
A825/S613 (Lasher/Myrie), which would 
give prosecutors direct access to police 
databases, would also help.
	
F Fully and rapidly implementing technology to 
facilitate the review and transfer of evidence 
between NYPD, district attorneys, and 
defense lawyers (both institutional providers 
and 18B lawyers). Tens of millions of dollars 
have been allocated to district attorney and 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

32
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
public defender offices for this technology 
over the past several years, but only now is it 
starting to be implemented.
	
F DOC ensuring incarcerated people have the 
technological capability to securely review 
the evidence in their cases, such as via the 
tablets DOC provides.
	
F The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner and 
the NYPD crime lab providing testing on a 
timely basis, helped by hiring and retention 
incentives where necessary.
	
F The Governor and State Legislature 
providing OCA additional funds to fully staff, 
implement, analyze, and publicly report on 
the case processing initiatives. That should 
include an expansion of the number of 
judges or court personnel, if justified.
Over time, we expect that OCA’s innovations will 
speed up more than just the longest of cases, 
as the different approach has a ripple effect and 
expectations and operations shift. For instance, 
cases that today are resolved after several 
months of incarceration by a person being 
diverted to a treatment program or taking a 
plea, might reach resolution more quickly thanks 
to case conferencing with a court attorney or 
expedited motion practice. Cases could be 
further sped up via quicker assessments for 
potential diversion and to determine whether 
people are so severely mentally ill that they 
cannot understand what is happening in 
the courtroom or assist in their defense. For 
instance, per Correctional Health Services 
(CHS), on average it takes CHS psychiatrists 
31 business days to complete competency 
assessments after they have been ordered by 
the courts. Speeding that up to 10 business 
days would mean almost 90 fewer people in jail. 
Legislative reforms to the mental competency 
process should also be explored. 
Finally, as discussed below, expanding over time 
the continuum of community-based programs 
and services for people with serious mental 
illness and addiction, especially for homeless 
people, will provide judges with strong, 
appropriate diversion options, also helping 
speed up case resolutions. 
Thus, it is conceivable that the full panoply of 
case processing reforms, once fully instituted, 
could reduce the jail population by up to  
2,000 people. 
Source: Bebeto Matthews/AP

THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Safely Right-Size Jail Population  
Part 2: Priority Investments  
and Reforms
33
VI.

34
VI. To close Rikers, New York City – with assistance from New York 
State – must prioritize meeting the mental health and addiction 
treatment needs of people cycling into jail, and, while protecting 
public safety, surgically ensure no one is jailed who could be 
safely supported in the community.
A. Double electronic monitoring capacity to 800 people citywide
2 0 2 3  P R E T R I A L  U S E  O F  E L E C T R O N I C  M O N I T O R I N G  ( E M ) 55
NYC: 153,666 arraignments;  
59 placements on EM pretrial = 0.00038%
Westchester: 8,608 arraignments;  
143 placements on EM pretrial = 1.7%
Suffolk: 31,336 arraignments;  
454 placements on EM pretrial = 1.4%
Nassau: 21,904 arraignments;  
1,163 placements on EM pretrial = 5.3%
It is clear from our research and data analysis 
that there are multiple paths to safely reduce 
the jail population – and ensure we can close 
Rikers. The following investments should 
be prioritized and started to be phased in 
immediately. We project that the following 
combination of steps by New York City, in  
close partnership with New York State, will  
result in an incarcerated population of 4,500 
people or fewer.
Stakeholders in the justice system have agreed 
that there is a population of people held in 
New York City’s jails that have an appropriate 
risk profile to be safely released to community 
supervision, with the additional oversight 
provided by electronic monitoring. Notably, 
courts in NYC use electronic monitoring far less 
than surrounding counties for people who are 
pre-trial, awaiting their day in court.
We are pleased that in November 2024, the 
Adams Administration added $5.3 million to the  
budget specifically for electronic monitoring 
expansion. This will increase the number of 
people that can be supervised on electronic 
monitoring from 200 to 400, with a laudable 
focus on ensuring there are enough NYC 
Sheriff deputies (who operate local electronic 
monitoring) to provide proper monitoring  
and supervision. 
Over the next three years, NYC should double 
its electronic monitoring capacity to 800 
people.56 Those 400 additional bracelets would 
cost $10.6 million to operate annually.
As this expansion moves forward, the City 
together with the Courts, should study the 
impact of electronic monitoring on re-arrests, 
compliance with conditions of release (such 
as house arrest or participation in treatment or 
programming), job maintenance, and appearance 
rates for court dates. There should also be 
rigorous analysis conducted to ensure that the 
people released under electronic monitoring 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

35
are only people who would otherwise be jail 
bound, to guard against legitimate concerns 
of net widening of supervision of people who 
would have been released otherwise, with less 
onerous conditions. Additionally, to maximize 
effectiveness, the electronic monitoring program 
should pair monitoring with robust  
community-based supports and case 
management, rather than just monitoring alone. 
B. Expand Supervised Release’s Intensive Case Management pilot citywide to 
connect more people with serious mental illness and addiction issues with 
services, ensure they come to court, and head off the commission of more crimes. 
A relatively small core group of people commit 
a disproportionate number of lower-level crimes 
in New York City. In 2024, 3,316 people were 
arrested and prosecuted five or more times.57 
43% of those charges were for misdemeanor 
larceny, theft, burglary, or fraud; 14% for felony 
larceny, theft, burglary, or fraud; and 12% were 
for misdemeanor assault.58 Similarly, the Mayor’s 
Office of Criminal Justice found that in 2022, 8% 
of people arrested citywide were responsible for 
60% of petit larceny arrests and 57% of felony 
burglary arrests.59 They were also eight times less 
likely to show up to court hearings than those 
who aren’t repeatedly charged with crimes.60  
Many of these people are addicted to drugs 
and alcohol, often have suffered abuse, may 
have a serious mental illness, and frequently 
have deep suspicion about government systems 
and services. They may have limited access to 
resources and support, especially after COVID 
disrupted access to support networks. While jail 
as a last resort is appropriate for some of  
these people, many have already spent time at 
Rikers; that did not stop the reoffending cycle.  
A multi-pronged approach is needed.  
One example is pre-trial Supervised Release 
Intensive Case Management (ICM). Traditional  
pre-trial supervised release, which reminds 
people of their court dates and has case workers 
check in with people and offer them services, 
has a solid record. However, it has proven 
often insufficient for this high-needs group. 
To address this, the Mayor’s Office of Criminal 
Justice has funded two Supervised Release ICM 
lots to provide intensive case management and 
connection to services, therapy, and treatment 
for people with serious mental illness and 
addiction issues who are released pre-trial.
A control group study is expected to provide 
at least preliminary results this Spring. Initial 
indications, with low caseloads, are positive.61  
So long as those results bear out, and as even 
relatively incremental gains with this population 
are beneficial, the City should expand Intensive 
Case Management to all boroughs. Per the 
Mayor’s Office of Management and Budget, such 
an expansion would cost roughly $46 million.  
We also urge the City to provide funding 
so caseworkers can continue to work with 
participants for at least 90 days after their 
criminal case is resolved. People’s needs do  
not end simply because their case does. 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Source: Seth Wenig/AP

36
NYC has some of the best diversion programs 
in the country. They should be used to their 
maximum potential. New York City’s diversion 
programs work to: 
	
F hold accountable people charged with 
violent & non-violent crimes 
	
F link people to treatment, housing & 
community-based support, aiming to address 
the root causes of crime
	
F cut reoffending, improve outcomes, and 
increase safety 
These programs are not a guarantee of success, 
but they have a much better track record at 
combatting reoffending than Rikers – at far less 
cost. On average, 33% of people released from  
Rikers return within 1 year.64 That number rises to 
36% for people with mental illness.65 Rikers costs 
an average of more than $400,000 per 
incarcerated person per year.
C.
D.
Expand Treatment Courts for people with serious mental illness and addiction 
issues, and expand access to and eligibility for those courts.  
Expand proven alternative to incarceration and re-entry programs,  
with a focus on mental illness, addiction, and preventing reoffending.
Treatment courts specialize in working with 
people with serious mental illness and addiction 
issues to direct them to care and support. After 
thorough assessments, and with the cooperation 
of district attorneys, judges and health care 
professionals craft comprehensive treatment 
plans that at once hold people accountable and 
put them on a path to better health. Often, but not 
always, defendants plead guilty in exchange for a 
promise that if they adhere to treatment for a set 
period, the charges will be dismissed or reduced. 
Problem solving courts have strong track 
records, including for people facing serious 
felony charges.62 However, they have also 
limited capacity. For instance, 575 people at 
Rikers with a serious mental illness have a 
case in Manhattan.63 Yet, mental health court in 
Manhattan is funded to handle only 50 cases at 
a time. Capacity should be increased. 
State legislation known as the Treatment Court 
Expansion Act is being negotiated with the goal 
of increasing access to and eligibility for these 
courts. Any remaining issues in the bill should be 
resolved swiftly.
In addition, justice system players repeatedly 
told us that to maximize the problem-solving 
courts’ success, more specialized housing and 
residential treatment options, willing to work 
with this often-challenging population, must  
be created. 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
F	Nathaniel ACT, run by CASES: An ATI 
program with an integrated mobile mental 
health treatment team for people with 
serious mental illness charged with serious 
crimes, CASES reports that the program 
reduces homelessness by 70% and 
psychiatric hospitalizations by 50%. Two 
years after completing court supervision,  
no Nathaniel ACT clients had new violent 
felony convictions and 94% had no new 
felony convictions. The program costs  
about $31,000 per client.66 About half the 
funding comes from Medicaid. The program 
was recently expanded, but those new  
slots are expected to be filled completely  
in short order. 
F	The Women’s Project: The Women’s  
Project at Wildcat/Fedcap provides women 
and gender-expansive people who would 
otherwise be incarcerated with individually-
tailored plans and connections to housing, 

37
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
social services, food, job training, employment 
and healthcare. The program has no charge 
restrictions and actively seeks to work with 
people with challenged backgrounds and high 
risk of rearrest. The overwhelming majority 
of participants have suffered physical, 
sexual and/or emotional violence, with very 
significant numbers having serious mental 
illness diagnoses and lack of stable housing. 
In 2024, the Women’s Project served 58 
participants; of the women released from 
Rikers, 70% accessed behavioral health 
treatment, 88% secured stable housing, and 
nearly a quarter became employed. 88% of 
these released persons successfully remained 
out of Rikers, with 94% avoiding a violent 
felony rearrest. The total cost of the Project 
for 2024 was $1,170,000, or slightly over 
$21,000 per participant.
F	Fountain House: Fountain House provides 
community and support in New York City to 
over 2,000 individuals with severe mental 
illness (and only the most severe mental 
illnesses), 40% of whom have a history 
of homelessness, 30% have a history of 
substance use disorder, and 25% a history of 
incarceration and justice system involvement. 
In doing so, Fountain House has reduced 
crisis interventions and emergency room 
visits, leading to medical cost savings for 
high-need users of over $9,000 per year. 
Similarly, Fountain House doubles the rate 
of employment for participants, reduces 
reoffending to 5%, increases stable housing 
placements, and reduces key social drivers 
such as loneliness, relative to other people 
with serious mental illness.  Fountain House’s 
new pilot programs with Fortune Society, in 
the Extended Care Unit of Bellevue Hospital, 
and with the Time Square Alliance for long-
term engagement of unsheltered people with 
serious mental illness, all show significant 
early signs of success. Fountain House’s 
services cost an annual average of  
$8,000 per client.67
To ensure the continued success of diversion 
and other violence and crime prevention 
programs, the City must continue to tackle 
contract processing and payment delays. Many 
non-profits cannot afford to provide services 
while waiting for months for City reimbursement. 
The City could also offer management and 
organizational training and support for newer, 
smaller non-profits, perhaps via the Department 
of Small Business Services.
Additionally, the success of ATIs and re-entry 
programs would be enhanced by the ability to 
access transitional and supportive housing  
beds, which the City has already pledged to 
bring online. 
E. Expand the 6-A Work Release Program to provide robust re-entry supervision 
and support for people serving city sentences (sentences of less than a year)  
to lower reoffending. 
To help end the cycle of reoffending, we propose 
the City make greater use of Article 6-A of New 
York Correction Law. Under 6-A’s authority, 
the Department of Correction has put a small 
number of people serving a sentence of less 
than a year, known as a City sentence, who meet 
relatively narrow criteria, on a work release 
program for the tail end of their sentence – a 
soft, supervised landing back in the community.68 
Under 6-A, instead of locking someone up for a 
4-8 month sentence69 and releasing them with 
no  supervision and often no support, people 
are released with supervision and check-in 
requirements, and with connections to programs. 
Individuals who fail to comply with the release 
conditions or get arrested can be immediately 
re-incarcerated. As part of the program: 

38
	
F DOC completes an individualized transition 
plan with each participant, identifying  
critical reentry needs such as housing  
and employment.
	
F Each person who requires housing is 
provided with a safe residence. 
	
F Each person is paired with a designated 
community provider. 
	
F DOC transports each person to the 
community-based provider for intake or to 
the transitional housing residence. 
	
F Participants must maintain weekly 
contact with a dedicated case manager, 
who provides guidance and support, 
and appropriately connects people with 
additional community-based services  
and providers.70  
Over the past several years, DOC has had strong 
success using 6-A. Of the 115 people released 
under 6-A between 2022 and 2024, only 6 were 
returned to Rikers for failure to comply with  
their conditions of release – and all of those 
were in 2022.71 Of the 6, only 1 was returned  
on a new charge.72 
In the early days of COVID, DOC used 6-A 
to review individual cases and release 296 
people who had been sentenced to jail, under 
monitoring by supervised release providers. 
Those 296 people made up 55% of all people 
serving City sentences at the time.73 54%  
had been convicted of a felony and 46% of  
a misdemeanor.74  
The evidence indicates that operating the 
6-A program on this sizable scale – even on 
an emergency basis with all the constraints 
of COVID – did not jeopardize public safety. 
After six months, of the 296 people released, 
9% (26 people) had been re-arrested, and 4% 
(13 people) had been returned to Rikers.75 Less 
than 1% (2 people) was re-arrested on a violent 
felony.76 During those 6 months, supervised 
release agencies made more than 400 referrals 
of participants to community-based supportive 
services.77 Housing was the number one need 
(40%).78 However, providers reported that agency 
closures due to COVID sometimes prevented 
linking people to community resources, which 
likely hindered fuller success by the cohort.79 
A longer-term forthcoming study, which 
tracked released people for two-years, found 
no significant differences in overall re-arrest, 
felony re-arrest, or violent felony re-arrest rates 
between 6-A participants released during the 
pandemic and a similarly situated comparison 
group sentenced to jail in 2018.80 
Despite this success, in 2024 DOC used 6-A for 
only 43 people, out of 2,745 people who served 
City sentences over the course of the year. 
We recommend careful expansion of the 
6-A program. Release decisions should be 
individualized. However, it is very likely that 
more people, especially people convicted of 
non-domestic violence misdemeanors and non-
violent felonies, who have followed jail rules 
(both while held pre-trial and while serving their 
sentence), could be released under 6-A with 
low risk to the public. 6-A offers a better chance 
at reducing reoffending than the status quo. 
Electronic monitoring could be introduced where 
appropriate as an additional security measure.81
The newly re-established Local Conditional 
Release Commission is also a strong vehicle 
to craft smart re-entry plans for people serving 
sentences, who can then be released under the 
watch of the Department of Probation.    
Finally, allowing people to earn merit time credits 
off their sentences for successfully participating 
in educational, vocational, and rehabilitative 
programs would encourage attendance, promote 
good conduct, advance rehabilitation, and help 
reduce the jail population. There is a strong 
body of research showing that these programs 
reduce reoffending and incarceration, while 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

39
In 2024, almost 700 people were jailed on Rikers 
who were so profoundly mentally ill that they 
could not comprehend what was happening in 
court or assist in their defense.84 On average, it 
takes months for people who are not competent 
to be assessed by two psychiatrists, known as a 
730 exam, for a court to rule on competency, and 
then if they are found not competent, for a State 
psychiatric hospital bed to open up for treatment 
and education sessions about the court process. 
If a person is found incompetent, their criminal 
case is put on hold.
People then remain at that state hospital until 
doctors deem them “restored to competency”  
and send them back to Rikers for their criminal 
case to resume.85 However, once returned 
to Rikers, where some of the supports and 
treatments available in state hospitals are not 
available, many decompensate and re-enter 
the competency assessment and restoration 
process, while their cases linger. 
There are multiple bottlenecks in this process. 
First, per Correctional Health Services, 730 
exams take an average of 31 business days, or 
43 calendar days, to complete. People often 
miss their appointment because officers are 
not available to transport them. Compounding 
the delays, there is simply no room in the State 
forensic psychiatric hospitals that restore people 
to competency, Kirby and Mid-Hudson.86 Only 
once someone gets discharged from one of 
those two hospitals back to Rikers will another 
person from Rikers be admitted. But, the beds 
do not have high turnover; at least half the 
patients have been in the forensic hospitals over 
a year (50% for Kirby, 57% for Mid-Hudson).87 As 
a result, people languish at Rikers for an average 
of 79 days waiting for a bed to open up. That 
puts a tremendous burden on Rikers staff, who 
as discussed elsewhere in this report, often lack 
adequate training and support to work with this 
difficult population.88 
F. Open 500 new secure forensic psychiatric treatment beds, ideally at a State 
facility in or near New York City, primarily for people so severely mentally ill that 
they are not competent to stand trial. This will raise the total number of beds in 
the new system replacing Rikers to 5,000.
saving money.82 Legislation introduced in prior 
years in Albany would allow New York City and 
other jurisdictions to establish jail-based merit 
credit programs.83 Under the bill, people could 
earn and bank credits while held pretrial, which 
would be applied if and when they are convicted 
and sentenced.
M E N TA L  C O M P E T E N C Y  B O T T L E N E C K S
200
43
115
79
P E O P L E
C A L E N D A R 
D AY S
P E O P L E
C A L E N D A R 
D AY S
Number of people  
at Rikers undergoing 
competency  
assessments
Number of people at 
Rikers found incompetent 
and now waiting for  
State hospital bed
Average time to 
complete court-ordered 
competency assessment
Average time between 
finding of incompetence and 
transfer to State hospital
Source: Correctional Health Services, Fall 2024
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

40
To end this unacceptable situation, we propose 
500 new secure forensic psychiatric treatment 
beds primarily for this very ill population, 
ideally at a State facilitiy in or near New York 
City. As mentioned, this would effectively raise 
the total capacity of the system replacing Rikers 
to 5,000 beds. We believe these beds will 
provide the capacity that is necessary to meet 
the needs of this population in an appropriate 
setting, while enhancing safety.
We envision assessments, intensive treatment, 
and step-down care all taking place in the units. 
By taking transportation challenges out of the 
equation, and concentrating staff to perform 
assessments, the 730 assessments could 
happen more quickly. Similarly, because the 
person would already be in a facility capable of 
providing restoration services, stepped up care 
could begin immediately. Once the person is 
restored to competency, people could remain 
in the same treatment facility, rather than be 
transferred to the jails, allowing for continuity  
of care. At that point, every effort should be 
made to swiftly resolve people’s criminal  
cases, to avoid decompensation and repeating 
the 730 cycle. 
To her great credit, Governor Hochul has 
proposed funding 100 additional forensic 
inpatient beds on Wards Island in her FY26 
budget proposal. We fully support that proposal 
and urge the Governor and Legislature to phase 
in 400 more forensic psychiatric treatment 
beds over the next three years. Ideally, these 
beds would be at or on the grounds of a State 
facility in or near New York City. We envision 
these beds would be run by health care 
authorities, who also provide security, as Kirby 
and Mid-Hudson do now. 
As each tranche of these beds are brought on-
line, the size and makeup of the incarcerated 
population should be re-assessed to determine 
what additional approaches or investments 
might be necessary. We also recommend 
exploring all legal options to make care in these 
beds eligible for Medicaid reimbursement.89   
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Source: Julie Jacobson/AP

THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Phase in Investments to Fill Gaps in 
Treating Serious Mental Illness and 
Addiction, and Combat Reoffending
41
VII.

42
To create a safer, more sustainable system long-term, the City 
should phase in targeted investments to fill gaps in the continuum 
of treatment, specialized housing, and support that people with 
serious mental illness and addiction need to stabilize and avoid 
criminal activity in the first place and after release from jail. 
VII. 
The lack of safe, appropriate community-based 
alternatives to Rikers, especially housing and 
residential treatment for people with serious 
mental illness and addiction issues, means 
judges often feel they have no choice but to 
send someone to Rikers rather than release 
them to a shelter or the streets, where they are 
unlikely to adhere to treatment. Jailing these 
people temporarily incapacitates them, but that 
rarely breaks the reoffending cycle. Often, the 
destabilization of Rikers exacerbates people’s 
challenges, while costing about $1,100 per day. 
It is time for a better path. The judicious use of 
jail should be coupled with a robust continuum  
of treatment, specialized housing, and support 
needed for people with serious mental illness  
and addiction, built out strategically and 
methodically over the next several years. 
Improvements and investments in such 
programs are critical to preventing the inflow 
and return of people who should not and would 
not be in the justice system if the right mix of 
services and support were available.
Thankfully, New York City is not starting from 
scratch – far from it. We already have a solid 
base of many of the services and supports  
that are necessary, and both the State and  
City have paid increasing attention to these 
matters in recent years. But there are clear  
gaps that everyone would benefit from filling 
with proven solutions.   
As Professor John J. DiIulio, Jr. wrote over  
30 years ago: “the prevalence and severity 
of crime depend mainly on factors affecting 
individuals long before most are taken into 
custody. … [They] do not depend mainly on  
what justice practitioners do.”90 At the same 
time, as Professor DiIulio also wrote, “[u]
nquestionably, the justice system affects 
crime and recidivism rates.” Therefore, as 
the Sequential Intercept Model teaches, our 
justice system should use each touch point 
with someone charged with a crime to try to 
intervene and divert them where appropriate.
TA R G E T  P O P U L AT I O N  F O R  K E Y  I N V E S T M E N T S :  
People with Serious Mental Illness, Drug and Alcohol Addiction
As mentioned earlier in this report, with 
insufficient treatment options for mental illness 
in the community, Rikers has become the default: 
57% of the people there have a mental illness, 
including 83% of women. 21% have a serious 
mental illness, up from 11% in FY 2015 and 
15% in FY 2020. 1,400 people at Rikers have a 
serious mental illness, up from 1,160 in February 
2023.91 About 300 people in Rikers are so 
profoundly ill that they are unable to comprehend 
what is happening in their cases or assist in 
their defense, or have exhibited behavior so 
concerning that a judge has ordered that their 
competency be assessed. 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

43
PERCENT OF PEOPLE WITH SERIOUS MENTAL ILLNESS IN NYC JAILS
PERCENT OF WOMEN AND MEN NEEDING MENTAL 
HEALTH SERVICES IN THE NYC JAIL POPULATION
40%
80%
90%
100%
10%
20%
20%
40%
30%
60%
0%
0%
35%
70%
5%
10%
15%
30%
25%
50%
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Source: New York City Council.
Source: Data Collaborative for Justice (analysis of Department of Correction data).
Note: Each year is represented by one snapshot data point; it is not always the exact same date but is consistently within the given year’s first 90 days.
78%
11%
11%
10%
14%
17%
17%
16%
19%
20%
21%
15%
75%
42%
50%
50%
53%
55%
84%
82%
82%
80%
83%
49%
43%
Women
Men
FY2015
FY2018
FY2021
FY2016
FY2019
FY2022
FY2024
FY2017
FY2020
FY2023
FY2025
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

44
People with mental illness on average stay in jail 
70% longer than people without.92 The longer 
they stay, the more profound their illness often 
becomes, and the more they tend to be involved 
in serious incidents inside the jails. Missed 
medical appointments are a major problem.93 
In just six months in 2023, the Department 
of Correction reported over 550 attempted 
suicides and instances of self-injurious behavior. 
Over the past three years, at least 19 people have 
reportedly died by suicide, drug overdose, and 
other causes related to mental health at Rikers. 
Yet, most staff lack specialized mental health 
training. Nor did most contemplate working with 
an increasingly ill population when they signed 
up to work in the jails.
The vast majority of people at Rikers with a 
serious mental illness come straight back to our 
communities. Frequently, they are destabilized, 
worse off than when they went in. The result: 
35% of people with serious mental illness 
return right back to Rikers within just one year. 
Not just rearrested – back in Rikers.
Meanwhile, almost 1,900 people at Rikers have 
alcohol use disorder (6 or more drinks per day), 
and 1,600 have an opioid use disorder.94 Almost 
900 are receiving drug treatment (13% of the 
population). Only 1% are receiving alcohol use 
disorder treatment.95 25% are homeless.96 
There is significant overlap between these 
categories. Per Correctional Health Services: 
P E R C E N T  O F  P E O P L E  W I T H  S E R I O U S  M E N TA L  I L L N E S S  W H O  A L S O :
42%
Report 
Homelessness
19%
Have an opiod 
use disorder 
history
38%
Have an  
alcohol use  
disorder history
Have both an opiod 
use and an alcohol use 
disorder history
10%
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Our Commission has not attempted to create a 
comprehensive mental health plan for New York 
City – that is beyond our remit, though progress 
on a broader mental health approach is highly 
relevant to safely reducing the jail population.97 
We have focused on recommendations that 
should have the biggest impact on the relatively 
small population of people with serious 
mental illness and addiction who commit a 
disproportionate number of crimes, and land 
in jail. Our proposals build on existing, proven 
efforts which are not yet at scale.98 
Success will require leadership on multiple 
levels. That includes advocating for targeted 
investments, even when the competition for 
dollars is fierce. It will also require the political 
bravery to fight for the fair distribution of 
essential services and treatment facilities, with 
all neighborhoods doing their part (even as 
those facilities must do all they can to be good 
neighbors – and be held accountable when they 
do not). Ultimately, it is inconsistent to support 
the closure of Rikers, and all the benefits that 
will bring, yet oppose locating needed housing, 
services, or treatment. Neighborhoods that 

45
The public safety and fiscal impact of programs 
targeted to serve these individuals will be 
incremental, but should be compounding. Over 
time, meeting people where they are, whether 
that be inpatient treatment, outpatient treatment, 
supportive housing, vocational training, etc. will 
help avoid emergency room visits and shelter 
stays, arrests, lost wages, harm to and costs for 
victims, justice system and incarceration costs, 
and crime and disorder’s drag on the economy. 
As investments are phased in over the next 
several years, the City should regularly assess the 
efficacy of the programs and the City agencies 
and non-profits providing the services. To do 
so properly and fairly, the City must ensure that 
non-profits are paid sufficient rates to recruit 
and retain staff, and to track and analyze data 
and results. Non-profits must also be paid on 
time. Despite taskforces and repeated reform 
pledges by City leaders, NYC still often takes a 
year or more to pay these vital agencies. It is hard 
to achieve change when you can barely make 
payroll. Meanwhile, poor-performing agencies 
infrequently get the support they need to 
improve. Few are cut off when they fail to do so. 
Again, this continuum would be alongside 
incarceration, allowing for the selection of the 
right approach for the person at that moment. 
Given the deep-rooted challenges people who 
cycle in and out of jail often have, treatment  
and support will not work for everyone, and for  
those for whom it does, it may take several 
tries. Not everyone will willingly engage with 
services.99 Some people will continue to 
commit crimes – even if hopefully fewer and 
fewer – while going through this process. How 
much patience and tolerance to have pending 
treatment has no easy answer, and must be 
considered on an individual basis. 
The following targeted investments will help 
fill the gaps in the continuum of treatment, 
specialized housing, and support that people 
with serious mental illness and addiction need 
to stabilize and avoid criminal activity. We 
envision these would be phased in over the next 
few years. Other similar investments, which will 
also fill key gaps, are listed in Appendix A. 
We encourage Council members, Borough Presidents, Community Boards and 
New Yorkers generally to welcome local siting of housing and services for people 
with justice involvement. We know that will take political courage. However, 
every neighborhood must do its part. Groups like the Fortune Society provide 
excellent models for how to engage the surrounding community to dispel myths 
and build positive relationships.  
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
already have more such siting – like those 
housing the new borough jails, or with a plethora 
of shelters – should receive community-led 
investments that improve quality of life, from 
economic development to parks to affordable 
housing to healthcare access. 

46
New York City and State run various mobile 
mental health treatment teams to try to provide 
care to people in the community with serious 
mental illness. Rather than a patient coming 
to an office or clinic for treatment, the mobile 
treatment teams go to the person, including 
searching for homeless people living on the 
street or in the subways. Many of the most ill 
people on the streets are initially reluctant to 
seek or cooperate with treatment. Some deny 
they have a mental illness or need treatment 
at all, which is actually a symptom of serious 
mental illness known as anosognosia. Mobile 
treatment teams work to establish relationships 
and move people toward treatment. 
When fully funded and staffed, mobile treatment 
teams have shown significant success. For 
instance, one study found they reduced rates 
of incarceration about 30% in the first year 
participants were engaged with intensive mobile 
treatment teams.102 They cost roughly $44,000 
per person per year.103 Again, the average cost of 
Rikers is $400,000 per person per year. 
Unfortunately, the teams currently have a 
waitlist of over 1,300 people.104 We propose that 
the State and City together determine how to 
eliminate those waitlists, including for instance 
by ensuring that the non-profit providers have 
sufficient funding to recruit and retain staff. 
Critical gaps in the continuum of care exist 
today. For instance, studies show that for people 
with serious mental illness, the biggest factor 
in whether they might commit a violent crime 
is whether they have co-occurring substance 
use.100 Yet, there is only one residential program 
in all of New York City specializing in treating 
this population, Harbor House. It has a months-
long waiting list. We estimate that 100 additional 
treatment beds for this population would cost 
City taxpayers roughly $2.5 million per year as 
Medicaid will cover most operating costs. 
Relatedly, judges have indicated they would  
be inclined to release more people with serious 
mental illness pending trial or in lieu of a jail  
or prison sentence if there were at least a 
semi-secure residential treatment option. No 
such facility yet exists, though one is slated to 
open in 2025: Hope House, developed and 
funded by the Greenburger Center. This pilot 
facility in the Bronx will have 16 beds for people 
charged with felonies who have a serious mental 
illness.101 Hope House will require people to plead 
guilty and agree to up to two years of in-patient 
treatment at the facility. They will be subject to 
electronic monitoring with 24-hour security on-
site. People will be arrested and returned to court 
if they leave the program. If they complete the 
program, they will not be subject to any further 
incarceration. 
Should this model prove successful, we would 
support similar facilities in each borough. We 
also recommend exploring whether a similar 
residential treatment option could be developed 
for people who are pre-trial but who do not wish 
to plead guilty. All such facilities should include 
discharge planning. 
B.
A.
End waitlists for mobile mental health treatment teams
Open 250 residential treatment beds in the community for people with serious 
mental illness and with co-occurring addictions 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

47
C. Expand and strengthen supportive housing to stabilize and support people  
with serious mental illness, including by integrating evidence-based,  
community-focused supports and behavioral health services. 
J U S T I C E  I N V O LV E D  S U P P O R T I V E  H O U S I N G
Supportive housing – permanent housing with 
wrap-around services for homeless people with 
serious mental illness – has been found to be 
effective in reducing jail stays and increasing 
positive health outcomes. In 2023, a 10-year 
retrospective control-group study was released 
of NYC’s FUSE supportive housing program for 
people with an intense history of cycling between 
incarceration and homelessness. Most had health, 
mental health, and/or substance use issues. The 
study found that over the 10 years, 87% of the 
people placed in FUSE had no jail stays, vs. 37% 
of the control group.105 Emergency room visits 
declined 23% and hospitalizations 19%.106 
Those results lead not just to better outcomes, 
but to significant fiscal savings. For instance,  
the average hospitalization costs $108,270  
per month.107 The average supportive housing 
bed costs roughly $4,500 per month, or  
$55,000 per year, per the Corporation for 
Supportive Housing.108  
As of February 2024, 460 people at Rikers had 
been approved for supportive housing, after what 
can be a burdensome screening process.109 This 
is surely an undercount of the number of people 
there who need supportive housing.110 In 2022, 
the Corporation for Supportive Housing released 
an estimate that over 2,500 people cycling 
into Rikers annually need supportive housing. 
However, most cannot access it, due to limited 
supply and the city’s overly restrictive eligibility 
criteria, which effectively bar people who have 
been in jail over 90 days from most supportive 
housing.111 The average length of stay at Rikers  
is 98 days.112  
A City program called Justice Involved 
Supportive Housing (JISH) permits people with 
the highest rates of jail and shelter use to access 
to supportive housing even if they spend more 
than 90 days in Rikers. However, there are only 
120 JISH units citywide, well short of the need. 
In 2019, the City agreed to add 380 more JISH 
units, bringing the total to 500. However, since 
then, the City has offered to pay non-profits an 
unrealistic rate for rent and services. As a result, 
not a single one of those units has come online. 
In the FY25 City budget, the Council successfully 
won increased funding for the 125 existing JISH 
units for the next three years. That will help 
ensure they are properly maintained and staffed. 
But no additional money was added to the pool 
for the long-promised 380 additional units. 
Based on our conversations with supportive 
housing and mental health care providers, 
clinicians, and program participants, we 
recommend that moving forward the City 
develop a cohort of “JISH-plus” beds. These  
beds would offer: 
	
F congregate, single-occupancy units
	
F an accordion of services flexible enough to 
meet tenants’ evolving needs (usually more 
intensive at the outset)
	
F onsite clinical care
	
F an integrated clubhouse community113  
Peers should be integrated throughout. People 
with lived experience are often able to build 
relationships and facilitate conversations and 
ease treatment. Peer counselor positions also 
add a career path for people with serious mental 
illness, who can have major challenges in finding 
steady employment. 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

48
We project that bringing the long promised 380 
JISH units online, though as JISH-plus units, would 
cost roughly $70,000 per unit, or $26.6 million. 
The Health and Hospitals Corporation (H+H) is 
also commendably working with the Fortune 
Society to create 58 supportive housing units 
at Jacobi Hospital in the Bronx. This will be the 
first supportive housing project in New York City 
for formerly incarcerated people with complex 
medical needs. The Mayor and his team have 
stood strongly for the project, known as Just 
Home, in the face of fierce neighborhood 
opposition, at town halls and otherwise.
B R I D G E  T O  H O M E
Another pipeline project that would fill a critical 
gap is Bridge to Home, announced by the City 
in January 2025, for people with serious mental 
illness who are ready for discharge from NYC 
Health + Hospitals but have nowhere to go. 
For 6-12 months, Bridge to Home will provide 
100 single rooms, structured recreation, and 
individualized, comprehensive behavioral health 
care on-site, including substance use disorder 
treatment. H+H expects the intervention will 
reduce unnecessary emergency room visits 
and inpatient hospitalizations, decrease street 
homelessness and reliance on shelters, and 
lower interactions with the criminal justice 
system. People will then be placed in appropriate 
permanent housing. H+H expects to open the 
beds in FY27, at an annual cost of $13 million.
D. Provide robust jail-based rehabilitative, education, and re-entry programming 
for all incarcerated people.
Jail-based programming is proven to reduce 
violence in jail and re-offending upon release.114  
NYC law mandates that DOC provide at least five 
hours of programming every business  
day to people in custody.115 New York City must 
meet this goal, and should go further to reduce 
idleness and ensure people are prepared as well 
as possible for their release.
What we see is these services bringing down idleness in the jails.  
When our program was in the units, we realized there’s no stabbings, no fights.
-  P R O G R A M  P R O V I D E R  W H O  W A S  A L S O  F O R M E R LY  I N C A R C E R AT E D  O N  R I K E R S 116
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Today, DOC falls far short. That is due in part 
to the 2022 decision to slash $17 million in 
non-profit contracts. Those providers reported 
to the Commission that they collectively 
served 1,500 people every weekday: 90-150 
minutes of programming per day in each of 
almost 200 housing areas in seven different 
jails.117 Participants were also able to continue 
programming with the agencies in the 
community after their release. In the aftermath 
of these cuts, both group and individual sessions 
dropped significantly; and fewer of those in 
custody enrolled in workforce development 
programs. DOC did recently release RFPs to 
restore $14 million for programming, substance 
use counseling, and re-entry. This is a positive 

49
In 2024, 17,000 times someone was released 
from Rikers straight to our communities – 
about 1,400 discharges a month.118 Each time 
that happens is an opportunity to ensure the 
person is on a better path than what led them 
to Rikers. Not everyone will need help or 
intensive services. But it should be available to 
anyone who would benefit. Re-entry planning is 
particularly important for people who have  
been receiving treatment inside the jails for 
serious mental illness and drug addiction, 
including medication assisted treatment, or  
else whatever progress may have been made  
will swiftly be lost, to the detriment of the 
individual and public safety. 
Yet, too often, people are released from Rikers 
without an adequate re-entry plan or support, 
even when mandated by court order, as is the 
case for people receiving treatment for mental 
illness, or by law, as is the case for people 
serving City sentences.119 The goal must be to 
reduce the 33% of people released from Rikers 
who end up right back in jail (not just re-arrested, 
but back in jail) within one year.120 
In 2017, the City pledged to provide re-entry 
services to everyone leaving Rikers. It is not 
clear how close the City has come to meeting 
that pledge since, but unquestionably there is  
a major gap in doing so today.
An example was highlighted recently by a federal 
monitor appointed to oversee treatment of and 
discharge planning for people with serious 
mental illness. The monitor reported that a 21 
year-old man diagnosed with schizoaffective 
disorder and an IQ of 72 had been arrested 
during his hospitalization at a state psychiatric 
hospital.121 His social worker at Rikers noted that 
“Due to the class member’s cognitive limitations 
and lack of adaptive functioning he is unable 
to actively participate in discharge planning 
services…. It is unclear where he will live in 
the community.” Still, no one made efforts to 
contact his parents or to get information from 
South Beach Hospital in Staten Island about his 
prior inpatient treatment, beyond confirming 
his medications. The young man was ultimately 
released to his mother’s home without services 
in place, and he was reincarcerated two months 
after release.122
The 6-A program’s current approach to re-entry 
– discussed above – should be the model for 
everyone leaving Rikers and heading back to our 
communities, particularly individualized transition 
plans, placement in housing when needed, and 
transportation to service providers.123  
Filling the gaps in re-entry planning will have 
to be phased in. DOC has recently released an 
RFP for re-entry services. However, until the 
contracts are put in place, it is unclear how many 
people will be served by the providers. A place 
to start would be the 530 people who are serving 
City sentences, for whom re-entry planning is 
legally mandated. Their release dates are more 
predictable than people held pretrial, which 
should allow other challenges to be addressed 
E. Provide re-entry planning and access to services for the 74% of people  
at Rikers who return straight to our communities, with a special focus on  
people with serious mental illness and who are receiving drug treatment. 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
move, but not sufficient as even before the 2022 
cuts, less than five hours of programming per 
day was offered. 
To ensure sufficient and continuous support for 
programming, we recommend the City Council 
mandate that a specific percentage of the DOC 
budget be set aside for programming. This will 
help to ensure that programming continues to  
be prioritized.   

50
F. Grow the pipeline of future health care and correctional workers necessary  
to sufficiently staff the continuum of care and security we need. 
Every reasonable effort should be undertaken to 
grow the pipeline of future workers needed for 
this continuum. Our City and State face major 
shortages in workers trained for and willing to do 
the jobs we need for health care and corrections, 
as is the case around the country. From psychiatric 
nurses to correction officers, significant vacancy 
rates are hurting service delivery. Many treatment 
and service programs have trouble keeping 
caseloads reasonable. Existing correctional staff 
work exorbitant overtime (though that is in large 
measure due to poor staffing practices by the 
Department of Correction), leading to exhaustion 
and undue stress. 
Yet, our goal has to be more than filling existing 
vacancies. Over the next several years, we 
need to expand treatment and service capacity. 
Creative solutions are needed to recruit, train, 
and retain the workforce necessary for the 
continuum of care and security necessary for 
public safety. Retaining people will be in part  
a function of salaries, in part helping people  
deal with the intense nature of the job, and in 
part ensuring programs and institutions are  
run effectively. 
The City Council recently established a program 
at CUNY to encourage people to embark on 
social work careers, and H+H has stood up a 
robust loan repayment assistance program. 
Other ideas that have been raised to us, which 
are worth exploring: 
	
F Starting recruitment as early as middle and 
high school, with incentives to enter key 
fields, including internships, apprenticeships, 
subsidized education/training, bonuses, and 
loan repayment assistance. 
	
F Providing benefits to people who stay in 
employment for 3-5 years, such as small 
business loans, downpayment/mortgage 
assistance, and full TAP benefits (regardless 
of prior TAP usage). People who stay in their 
positions longer could qualify for advanced 
training/certificates/degrees, greater 
financial incentives, etc. 
	
F Opening new training programs and  
schools, possibly in neighborhoods hardest 
hit by crime, or in existing facilities like  
SUNY-Downstate. 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
in a more controlled setting, before expansion 
to the broader pretrial population. As early as 
possible, people should be provided a holistic 
assessment as to the medical and other needs. 
From there, caseworkers should develop a 
housing, employment, educational, and health 
care plan for anyone who needs the help.  
Certified peer specialists should be integrated 
into this process, connecting with people  
before release, then assisting them through  
the re-entry process.  

THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Revamp Department of Correction 
Operations and Culture
51
VIII.

52
Newer, safer facilities in much better locations, 
and a reasonably smaller jail population, are 
essential to safety and better outcomes. But 
they are not enough. For everyone involved, not 
least the general public, jail management and 
operations must improve dramatically. Three 
quarters of people in Rikers return straight to our 
communities. Their treatment and experience 
in Rikers directly impacts how they act when 
they return – and the likelihood they will commit 
another crime. 
Few things at Rikers work well. A sense of 
lawlessness pervades, putting everyone on  
edge and emboldening misconduct, assault,  
and more. In finding the City in contempt in 
Nunez, a Federal judge recently wrote: 
[T]he current rates of use of force, 
stabbings and slashings, fights, assaults 
on staff, and in-custody deaths remain 
extraordinarily high, and there has been 
no substantial reduction in the risk of 
harm currently facing those who live and 
work in the Rikers Island jails. … Worse 
still, the unsafe and dangerous conditions 
in the jails, which are characterized by 
unprecedented rates of use of force 
and violence, have become normalized 
despite the fact that they are clearly 
abnormal and unacceptable.
...
Since the entry of the Consent Judgment 
[in 2015], DOC staff have routinely failed 
to follow basic security protocols and have 
instead relied on poor security practices. 
The security failures and poor staff 
practice—both of which have continued 
unabated for years—contribute to both the 
high levels of use of force and the overall 
levels of violence in the jails.
[S]upervisory failures at multiple levels of 
uniform leadership have been and remain 
a consistent and pervasive source of 
dysfunction within DOC. … [T]hese failures 
contribute to chaos and violence in the 
jails, harm to incarcerated individuals, and 
excessive use of force… .124 
As of the drafting of this report, the Federal 
Court is considering seizing control of the jails 
and appointing a receiver to take some measure 
of control of the Department. Whether or not the 
Court takes that rare step, and no matter who 
is in charge of the jails, no one can reasonably 
question the need for dramatic change in how 
DOC operates. 
Rikers struggles to deliver basic services to 
incarcerated people. Anything that requires 
leaving a housing area, such as visiting a 
medical clinic or hospital, meeting with a lawyer 
or family member, going to recreation, or 
attending school requires an officer to escort 
the person. Due to staffing issues, including 
mismanagement, escorts are often unavailable.125 
That means people cannot access the services 
they need. That not only delays people’s cases 
VIII. Department of Correction operations and culture must be revamped 
to improve safety for everyone in the jails, reduce deaths of 
incarcerated people, enhance service delivery, and end excessive 
violence and lawlessness. The work must begin immediately so 
today’s problems are not shifted to the borough-based system. 
Change must be pursued regardless of receivership. Any receiver 
must work to hasten Rikers’ closure. 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

53
 
MONTHLY VIOLENCE AND SERIOUS INJURY 
AMONG PEOPLE IN CUSTODY 2015-2025
40
80
10.0
120
20.0
0
0
20
60
5.0
100
15.0
FY2015
FY2018
FY2021
FY2016
FY2019
FY2022
FY2024
FY2017
FY2020
FY2023
FY2025
Serious injury to individuals in custody as a result of violent incidents  
among individuals in custody (monthly rate per 1,000 ADP
Violent incidents among individuals in custory (monthly rate per 1,000 ADP
37.8
47.8
2.5
55.2
2.7
55.9
2.0
68.9
2.5
80.1
9.6
98.1
13.0
87
18.9
Violent Incidents Among PICs
Serious Injury to PICs
90.4
15.4
94.9
12.1
99.9
14.5
2.5
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Source: New York City Council, Report on the Fiscal 2026 Preliminary Plan and the Fiscal 2026 Preliminary Capital Commitment Plan for the  
Department of Correction
and prevents them from receiving medical 
care, but it leads to frustration, and at times to 
violence. Certain people were allowed to move 
unescorted in the past (with officers stationed at 
key points along the way), a common practice 
outside New York City; however, Rikers stopped 
doing this years ago due to security concerns.
The artificial inflation of the jail population adds 
to the challenges facing DOC. Not only are more 
escorts needed for more people, but having 
to house this many people requires operating 
more jails and housing areas. For instance, the 
Department recently re-opened parts of the 
Anna M. Kross Center, the largest jail on Rikers. 
The jail was closed in July 2023 after then-DOC 
Commissioner Louis Molina testified more than 
once that the building was beyond reasonable 
repair, including about 800 cell doors that did 
not lock properly.126
The inflated population also stretches line 
staff and supervisors even more thinly, adding 
to the need for overtime. The deteriorating 
physical plant at Rikers is also a source of major 
concern. Even though the Rikers jails will be 
closed within a few years, it is unacceptable to 
subject incarcerated people and staff to unsafe 
conditions in the meantime. Therefore, any 
urgent repairs must be undertaken to ensure 
people are safe and in habitable conditions. 

54
 
SYSTEMWIDE NUMBER AND 
RATE OF UOF, 2016-JULY 2024
 
SYSTEMWIDE NUMBER AND RATE OF 
STABBING/SLASHING, 2016-JUNE 2024
100
2,000
300
6,000
0.4
5
500
10,000
0.8
15
0
0
0
0
200
4,000
0.2
400
8,000
0.6
10
2019
2019
2017
2017
2018
2018
2016
2016
2020
2020
2021
2021
2022
2022
2023
2023
JAN-JUN 
2024
JAN-JUN 
2024
Number
UOF
Average Monthly Rate
Average Monthly Rate
159
4,652
3.96
4,780
4.32
5,901
7,169
8.21
6,197
11.3
8,184
12.23
7,005
10.34
6,784
9.33
3,589
9.3
0.14
131
0.12
95
0.09
120
0.14
121
0.22
420
0.63
468
0.69
384
0.53
152
0.41
5.9
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Source: Status Report by the Nunez Independent Monitor, November 2024
Source: Status Report by the Nunez Independent Monitor, November 2024

55
 
SYSTEMWIDE NUMBER AND RATE OF ASSAULTS 
ON STAFF WITH UOF 2016-JUNE 2024
200
0.6
600
1.4
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
1.8
1,200
0
0
0.2
400
1.0
800
1,000
2019
2017
2018
2016
2020
2021
2022
2023
JAN-JUN 
2024
Assault on Staff with UOF
Average Monthly Rate
842
0.72
862
0.78
978
0.97
1,109
1.25
825
1.51
1,115
1.67
799
1.18
654
0.9
323
0.86
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Source: Status Report by the Nunez Independent Monitor, November 2024
From our first report, the Commission has called 
out the importance of culture change and the 
urgent need to start this work immediately, 
rather than waiting until the new borough-
based facilities are opened. Reform must span 
recruitment, training, supervision, assignments, 
scheduling, operations, and staff support, not to 
mention DOC’s spoken and unspoken cultural 
norms. Success for these and other efforts 
will depend on the buy-in of DOC staff, and of 
incarcerated people. The well-being of both is 
deeply and inextricably intertwined.
A. Change is Required Across the Department of Correction
Centering the voices of staff and people incarcerated is crucial … . This means actually having 
solution-focused discussions with both groups where the problems that exist are laid out and 
collectively solutions are developed. When people see themselves in the answer and when 
people feel like they are a part of creating something, they are more likely to protect it.
This democratic style of leadership allows for changes to take root even when there is a 
different leader who is put in place, because the staff are going to outlast the person who is  
in charge. Sadly, many incarcerated people will also outlast the people who are in charge. 
-  N N E K A  J O N E S - TA P I A ,  
  F O R M E R  W A R D E N  O F  C O O K  C O U N T Y  J A I L ,  C H I C A G O 127 

56
We support a focus on four key areas, as 
outlined by Commission members Dr. Michael 
Jacobson and Margaret Egan and their 
colleagues in their blueprint for changing the 
culture of DOC:   
	
F Strengthening accountability through 
strong management and performance 
measurement
	
F Reenvisioning key policies and practices
	
F Revamped recruitment and hiring efforts 
that ensure new staff members share the 
new vision for the department 
	
F Enhanced education, training, and support 
for staff
Fortunately, the Department can build off a core 
of strong uniformed, civilian, and health care 
staff and leaders, and a range of home-grown 
ideas and programs that have shown promise. 
This includes on-going attention to steady 
staffing and increased programming with young 
adults at RNDC, recently-released RFPs for 
programming, drug counseling, and education, 
and Crisis Intervention Training to help staff work 
with people with serious mental illness.
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Source: Ted Shaffrey/AP

57
In developing the recommendations for this report, Commission staff and members met with both 
correctional union representatives and facility staff. SSEU Local 371 and SEIU 1199 both graciously 
assisted us with setting up opportunities to hear directly from their membership who work on 
Rikers Island. Across the board, it was clear that staff desire a mechanism for input into the new 
facilities and the future of corrections overall. While staff weighed in on a number of diverse 
topics that are touched on throughout the report, a few representative quotes of issues that came 
up consistently are reflected below:
On the need to address problems at Rikers today while planning long-term
“What happens to Rikers now, before 2029? Are we operating under the mindset  
that Rikers Island is crashing? We have no AC here now; the facilities are falling apart.  
How will repairs work in the meantime?”
On the challenges of a larger jail population and the need for dedicated mental health beds
“For this to be effective, courts have to move cases along faster and more efficiently … .  
As we prepare for this transition, what are we doing to reduce the jail population?”
“You need your own jail just for mentally ill patients, staffed with mental health professionals… 
. Pysch hospitals around the city have been closed. With the high rate of mental health 
patients in general, not even (just) incarcerated people, there’s a need to reopen those kinds 
of psych facilities.”
On programming
“We need a GED program, culinary programs, and different kinds of education…when creating 
programming spaces, these rooms should not just be four walls. They should have a blackboard, 
something to write on, and some sort of projector. Classrooms should have access to YouTube, 
and other ways to present educational content. It is important for the guys to have these 
resources that aren’t on the tablets they’re currently using, especially for visual learners.”
Although union representatives were clear that meeting with the Commission did not indicate 
that they supported the plan to close Rikers Island overall, we were deeply grateful to have 
the opportunity to hear their perspectives and, critically, to hear directly from many staff who 
work on the island. It was also clear that staff had many legitimate questions about the future 
of corrections and the implications of the plan for their livelihoods and place of work. Future 
planning should continue all efforts to engage with both union representatives and staff directly  
to ensure that their perspectives are heard and that they have as much information as possible  
on these issues which will impact their lives significantly.  
I N C O R P O R AT I N G  T H E  P E R S P E C T I V E S  O F  S TA F F  
I N  P L A N N I N G  A N D  D E S I G N I N G  F O R  T H E  F U T U R E  
O F  C O R R E C T I O N S
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

58
Given the scope of the problems at Rikers, and 
the almost constant drumbeat of crisis, it can be 
hard to know where to start. We strongly suggest 
that within the next six months, one of the 
existing jails on Rikers should be transformed 
into a laboratory for reform and ultimately a 
model jail. Policies and practices for this facility 
should be jointly developed by a range of actors, 
from correction officers, health care and civilian 
staff, and their unions, to currently and formerly 
incarcerated people and their families, service 
providers, attorneys, etc. Input, training, and 
support could be procured from jail and prison 
systems outside New York City, and from experts 
like those at AMEND and Chicago Beyond. 
DOC could also learn from other bureaucracies 
in New York City. For instance, the Sanitation 
Department, Fire Department, and NYC Health 
+ Hospitals have much better track records 
at ensuring essential posts are fully staffed. 
Private businesses like logistics, shipping, and 
transportation companies could also provide 
guidance about responsive staffing. 
Providing adequate resources and a reasonable 
timeframe to test what works best will  
be key. Private funding could be harnessed to 
spur innovation. DOC could undertake  
micro-experimentation where different 
approaches are tested out simultaneously 
in different housing units. Any laws or union 
contracts that prevent experimentation should 
be amended or renegotiated as needed. The 
best ideas should be instituted permanently, 
as part of making that jail a model facility. 
Those successes should then be methodically 
expanded to other jails, with fidelity and 
adequate staffing and resources. 
B. Transform a Current Jail into a Laboratory for Reform and a Model Jail
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Ideas to explore and implement in this model jail, alongside a full complement  
of programming and services, include the following, which once honed can be 
rolled out across Rikers and then in the borough facilities: 
	
F Assign staff to work steady assignments on 
steady teams with steady supervisors. This 
will enable correction officers to build trusted 
relationships with each other and with their 
supervisors, and to better understand the 
incarcerated people in their care. That will 
reduce miscommunication, inconsistent 
expectations, and stress. 
	
F Mentor correction officers, captains, and 
other supervisors, especially newly hired 
or promoted staff.128 Mentors could be hired 
from outside DOC, at least until a steady 
roster of mentors is developed.  
	
F Provide incentives & rewards for staff  
for good performance, including  
de-escalation, and tie promotions and 
preferred assignments to good performance. 
Union contracts and civil service law may 
have to be altered to permit this.  
	
F Provide incarcerated people with 
opportunities to earn privileges for good 
behavior and participation in programming. 
The goal should be to incentivize compliance 
with rules and re-entry preparation.    
	
F Ensure swift, certain, consistent, graduated 
discipline for staff and incarcerated people. 
This approach is proven to be the soundest 
practice when trying to deter and limit 
misconduct; it is more effective than the 
uncertain prospect of a harsh punishment. 

59
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
	
F Try out 10-hour shifts, fewer days a week, 
rather than current 8-hour shifts. Studies 
performed to date indicate officers serving 
10-hour shifts have higher quality of work life, 
get more sleep, and work significantly less 
overtime.129 
	
F Offer Crisis Intervention Training (CIT) to 
many more staff. CIT teaches officers and 
health care staff to operate as a team to 
effectively work with people with serious 
mental illness. The ranks of CIT-trained staff 
have been greatly depleted since COVID. 
	
F Provide leadership training for captains 
and other supervisors. These front-line 
supervisors are essential to change.  
Whether natural leaders or not, everyone 
could use tips on how to be a strong 
supervisor and mentor.   
	
F Establish regular performance evaluations 
by people’s direct supervisors and tie the 
evaluations into decisions on promotions, 
specialized, and awarded posts. 
	
F Provide incarcerated people with more 
individual choice and responsibility, similar 
to the 64-bed unit at Pennsylvania’s SCI 
Chester and modeled after some European 
approaches to incarceration. For instance, 
residents in the SCI Chester unit order 
groceries and cook in a communal kitchen, 
alongside officers. While its long-run effects 
remain under study, it appears to have 
raised the quality of life for both incarcerated 
people and officers, helping reduce violence 
and disorder. Among the promising impacts: 
breaking down the divide between officers 
and incarcerated people and replacing it with 
a feeling of shared goals: supporting people 
for life after incarceration.130 
When successful, a model jail can create 
champions among even the most initially 
skeptical staff members, and provide tangible, 
concrete evidence that conditions can and do 
improve. It is not necessary for the facility or 
units selected to be high-performing to begin 
with. To the contrary, these models are more 
powerful when they transform the most violent or 
otherwise dysfunctional places into safe, humane 
ones where staff want to work and people in 
custody are stable and can make real progress.

60
This approach would enable the Department 
to continuously grow and adapt; promote 
more inclusive, effective decision-making that 
is grounded in staff expertise and conditions 
on the ground; and enable the Department 
to learn from past performance and avoid 
making the same mistakes. Given the size and 
scope of DOC, it may make sense to roll out 
standardization and lessons learned in phases, 
jail by jail.
F	 Preoccupation with failure: attend to near 
misses, and continuously monitor for failures 
of all sizes, as even small problems can lead 
to much larger ones if not addressed. 
F	 Reluctance to simplify: recognize that 
problems may have multiple causes, and 
avoid using simplistic explanations and 
convenient categories at the expense  
of deeper investigation of circumstances  
and processes. 
 
F	 Sensitivity to operations: ensure situational 
awareness of events and processes as  
they unfold. 
F	 Commitment to resilience: ensure systems 
can react quickly and adapt as needed 
when failures or errors occur to ensure 
functionality even when setbacks occur.
F	 Deference to expertise: ensure that  
the people most knowledgeable are  
directly engaged in decision-making and 
problem-solving, regardless of their  
position in the hierarchy.
H R O S  A R E  C H A R A C T E R I Z E D  B Y  F I V E  K E Y  P R I N C I P L E S
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
C. Transform the Department into a High Reliability Organization
When we speak of culture, and the need for 
change at Rikers, we mean the spoken or 
unspoken beliefs, values, assumptions, and 
expectations that drive an organization and how 
its members think and act. At Rikers, as with 
many organizations, there is not one monolithic 
culture or one way of operating. Instead, due 
in part to frequent changes in leadership and 
focus, individual jails have fragmented into 
siloed subcultures. An officer moving from one 
facility to another at Rikers may experience 
disparate leadership priorities, overtime 
policies, personnel assignments, discipline, 
and more. This can lead to lack of trust, poor 
communication, and lack of clarity around key 
performance expectations, such as use of force. 
DOC should aim to stabilize and standardize 
its approach across all facilities by becoming a 
High Reliability Organization (HRO). HROs are 
complex, high-stakes organizations that could 
easily be prone to disaster yet largely avoid 
accidents and mistakes (think well-run hospitals 
or military branches). Critically, staff in HROs 
learn their roles and then can perform relatively 
interchangeably. Transfer between units should 
not require learning a different approach to the 
same issues. 

61
Correction officers and other jail-based staff 
have incredibly stressful, often thankless jobs. 
After all, when the most challenging, dangerous 
people are arrested and taken off the streets, 
it is the staff at Rikers that have to handle them 
and try to keep everyone safe. 
Work-related stress can negatively impact 
officers’ health, their work performance, and 
the lives of their families. Officers are required 
to work overtime frequently, disrupting their 
personal lives, denying them adequate rest and 
time off, and increasing the chance of burnout. 
Staff are subjected to frequent violence, and 
must be hyper vigilant even when nothing is 
happening. The more tired and stressed staff are, 
the more likely they will make mistakes or react 
badly in critical situations. 
Working as a correction officer can take a 
tremendous toll: according to the New York 
State Office of Mental Health, the average life 
expectancy for an officer is 16 years shorter 
than that of the average American.133 34% 
of correctional staff in security roles have 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 36% 
experience depression, and 25% of correctional 
staff experience both PTSD and depression.134 
Officers need proper support to maintain their 
own mental health, particularly in the wake of 
traumatic events, or they are more likely to burn 
out, harm themselves, or harm others in their 
personal and professional lives.
We recommend providing officers and other staff 
with mental health support that goes beyond 
access to the DOC CARE team. Some officers 
told us they feel CARE team services are not 
confidential and may negatively impact their 
careers. Connecting staff to impartial service 
providers not affiliated with DOC may allay those 
fears and encourage greater use.
In addition, we recommend that DOC create 
standard operating procedures to connect 
officers to care immediately after they are 
involved in a traumatic incident. Providing 
officers with the space and support to process 
their experience will help mitigate the worst 
effects of trauma and lower the chance that the 
stress they experienced impacts colleagues, 
incarcerated people, or loved ones. We were 
pleased to see DOC open a staff wellness center 
at one of the jails on Rikers recently, including a 
“serenity room” for use after stressful events.135 
We look forward to the promised expansion to 
other facilities. 
E. Staff Wellness and Support
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
D. Pursue Correctional and Health Care Accreditation
DOC should also work to secure correctional 
and health care accreditation. Organizations 
like the National Commission on Correctional 
Health Care (NCCHC) do more than set minimum 
standards, they set ambitious goals for strong 
organizations. A recent control group study 
found U.S. jails that earned NCCHC accreditation 
improved significantly.131 Mortality dropped over 
85% in the six months after NCCHC completed 
its certification process. Staff communicated 
better, felt better trained and more valued at 
work. Returns to jail dropped 13% three months 
after release and 21% after six months.132

62
I N C E N T I V I Z E  P O S I T I V E  B E H A V I O R
I M P O S E  S W I F T,  C E R TA I N ,  G R A D U AT E D  D I S C I P L I N E  
F O R  M I S C O N D U C T
Very few people feel the disciplinary process at 
Rikers is fair or effective. Officers, captains, and 
correction union leaders repeatedly told us they 
believe uniformed staff receive strict oversight 
and discipline, but incarcerated people face few 
consequences for their misconduct. Meanwhile, 
the Federal Nunez Monitor and advocates for 
incarcerated people frequently lament what they 
see as a poorly functioning employee disciplinary 
system that they feel holds too few staff 
accountable and delays accountability too often. 
The result is the impression on all sides 
that misconduct will rarely be met with 
consequences. That perception leads to 
lawlessness, and emboldens people to act out, 
sometimes violently. That has to change.
Best practices suggest using incentives and 
rewards for positive behavior and swift, certain, 
graduated discipline for misconduct. Such an 
approach is proven more effective than deferred 
or potential severe punishment.136 
Staff should be recognized and rewarded for 
helpful initiative, de-escalation, and leadership. 
It should never be taken for granted how 
difficult de-escalation is, especially staying 
calm and patient enough to use various 
tools effectively. Successful efforts should 
be immediately praised and proportionately 
rewarded. Wherever possible, those efforts 
should be taken into account in promotion and 
specialized post decisions. 
Similarly, incarcerated people should be able to 
earn privileges through good behavior, whether 
individually or by housing unit. People could 
then lose some or all such privileges for poor 
behavior, as part of graduated consequences. 
While the Department has tried this approach 
at times in the past, it has not been consistent 
across housing areas and jails. Nor has the 
Department been persistent, repeatedly allowing 
initiatives to wither.
For more serious misconduct, the accused 
person, whether an incarcerated person or 
officer, should be immediately removed from 
the post or housing area where the misconduct 
occurred. Too often, someone who assaulted or 
seriously harassed (including sexually)  
another person remains in place, reiterating  
the message that people can harm others 
without repercussion. 
F. Accountability and Discipline
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
34%
Have 
PTSD
Experience 
Depression
36%
Experience 
Depression + PTSD
25%
The New York State Office  
of Mental Health reports 
regarding correction officers: 

63
I N C A R C E R AT E D  P E O P L E
Adjudication of misconduct allegations must be swift, but fair. When misconduct is found, it 
should be met with graduated, appropriate consequences, imposed immediately. If that entails 
imposition of restrictive housing, that unit should provide programming and treatment with the 
goal of addressing the underlying reasons for serious or violent misbehavior. 
If prosecution is merited, people should be swiftly arrested and brought to trial. Today, those 
prosecutions often move slowly, even with significant camera coverage in the jails (provided  
the cameras are in good working order). Cooperation of incarcerated witnesses (and sometimes 
staff witnesses) can be hard to secure. Convictions often result in concurrent sentences. This 
can reinforce the impression that there is little consequence for violence in Rikers. 
S TA F F
On the staff front, the Nunez Monitor has found the Department of Correction “unable to 
promptly impose meaningful discipline,” adequately identify misconduct, or hold staff or 
supervisors accountable.137 For instance, among incidents that occurred between January and 
June 2024, only 16% of the roughly 1,000 full investigations into potential improper uses of 
force were completed within the mandatory 120 days. Just 37 cases were referred for formal 
discipline, significantly fewer than the Monitor felt merited. At the end of June 2024, 567 
investigations of uses of force remained pending from 2023, leaving the Monitor to conclude 
“the opportunity for timely discipline has clearly been lost.”138  
Even when investigations were completed, the Monitor found they were “often incomplete, 
inadequate, or unreasonable. Investigators often failed to complete necessary interviews 
with staff or persons in custody, did not identify all salient issues, disregarded objective 
evidence of misconduct, discredited allegations from people in custody without evidence, and 
recommended insufficient employee corrective action.”139 
Staff have also reported inconsistent disciplinary practices across different jails. They have 
stated those mixed messages create confusion about what is expected of them, and a sense of 
unfairness. DOC has pledged to address this, though it will require sustained attention. 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

64
There has been much debate over the use of 
isolation at Rikers. Over the past several years, 
DOC has altered and limited the use of isolation 
significantly, placing restrictions for young 
people, people with serious mental illness,  
and now the population as a whole. Specialized 
housing units were developed, some of  
which are no longer used. Enhanced  
Supervision Housing is the current officially 
sanctioned iteration.140  
These changes are often blamed for the rise 
in violence at Rikers, which has gotten worse 
during the same time period. It is notable 
that even before solitary and isolation were 
restricted, the levels of violence at Rikers were 
already so egregious as to be unconstitutional, 
as the Federal Court in Nunez has pointed out 
repeatedly – and as the City agreed in reaching 
the Nunez consent judgment back in 2015.
Staff reportedly have begun to take measures 
into their own hands. In October 2024, 
allegations surfaced of an unacceptable 
practice called “deadlocking” of people with 
serious mental illness.141  Reports indicated 
that people with serious mental illness were 
being locked in their cells for days and 
sometimes weeks straight, after some level of 
misconduct or perceived threat. Reasons given 
reportedly ran from assault to a person with 
serious mental illness looking at a correction 
officer “inappropriately and made her feel 
uncomfortable.”142 Deadlocking allegedly 
repeatedly took place in specialized units 
designated for people with serious mental 
illness, including to people so ill they were 
not competent to stand trial. State psychiatric 
hospitals are meant to take them, but they have 
no available space. So, the people are stuck in 
Rikers, often for months.
During the “deadlocking” period, people were 
reportedly not allowed out of their cells at all. As 
Correctional Health Services generally does not 
provide treatment through cell doors, that meant 
people often would not receive medication or 
treatment. Health care staff reported seeing 
people profoundly decompensate, including 
smearing their cells with feces.143 Health care 
staff reportedly felt powerless to intervene, and 
DOC leadership claimed it had not known of the 
practice.144 DOC has promised investigations, 
but their status is unclear. New DOC and CHS 
policies should be implemented to ensure 
deadlocking no longer occurs.145
G.
H.
Deadlocking of People with Serious Mental Illness Cannot Be Tolerated
Recruitment and Retention
The Department of Correction has been facing 
unsustainable levels of attrition over the past 
few years. Between January 2022 and October 
2024, DOC graduated 557 uniformed staff from 
the academy, but 2,325 left.146 That includes 147 
people who left after less than a year of service, 
and 62 who left after 1-2 years of service.147 That 
indicates many of the new hires left relatively 
quickly. While we believe the Department will 
not need as many officers in the borough-based 
system, losing staff at the current rate will be 
extremely detrimental.  
For years, recruitment of friends and relatives by 
existing officers and staff has been an essential 
piece of recruitment. However, staff told us 
that while they might have encouraged others 
to join near the outset of their career, given 
very difficult conditions in the jails, including 
the sense of lawlessness and perceived lack of 
accountability, they would not do so today. 
DOC also used to rely heavily on a generous 
salary and a strong pension. However, research 
shows that most people are no longer looking 
for a career for life, so monetary rewards 20+ 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

65
In 2023, the Department of Correction lowered 
educational requirements for new officers, 
eliminating the requirement that officers have at 
least 39 college credits.149 DOC also cut the time 
spent training at the academy from six to three 
months, and extended the on-the-job training 
period.150 In practice, this means new officers 
have less time to learn best practices before 
being thrust into challenging roles interacting 
directly with incarcerated people. 
One such best practice is Crisis Intervention 
Training. Adapted in-house to train correction 
officers and health care staff side-by-side on 
how to best work with people with serious 
mental illness, the ranks of officers with CIT was 
massively depleted during COVID. DOC should 
provide CIT more broadly to ensure a sufficient 
number of staff have the skills and resources 
they need to deal with the 21% of the Rikers 
population with a serious mental illness. 
More broadly, DOC should also look outside 
the Department for training ideas. For instance, 
correction officers in Norway undergo two years 
of training and receive significant training not 
just in security, but also law, ethics, and social 
work. Meanwhile, job descriptions there focus 
on therapeutic and rehabilitative services. Closer 
to home, the Department of Probation has 
extended its training from 12 weeks to 5 months, 
and reports being pleased with the results. 
years down the line hold less appeal. Instead, 
the number one reason Gen Z and Millenials 
chose an employer is work-life balance, 
something too often absent among  
correctional staff.148  
It is time for innovative approaches. Not only 
should DOC consider changing shift schedules 
to allow employees to work condensed 
workweeks, but if DOC can position a career in 
corrections as a step on a broader professional 
journey, it may be able to attract more people 
to the job. To do so effectively, New York City 
and New York State should work with unions 
and their members to develop educational and 
career support incentives for people who stay 
in key positions for three to five years. That 
could include TAP benefits and low-interest 
small business loans. People who stay in their 
positions longer could qualify for advanced 
training/certificates/degrees, greater financial 
incentives, etc. 
I.
J.
Training
Calibrate Staffing Levels to Support Safe, Efficient Facilities
The Department of Correction is budgeted 
for 7,060 uniformed staff, a level projected to 
extend out at least the next three fiscal years.151 
Given DOC’s attrition rates and difficulty hiring 
staff, it is very unlikely DOC will meet that 
budgeted number. Even if it could, DOC has not 
demonstrated that is the correct number of staff. 
The Department of Correction should be able 
to produce up-to-date staffing plans for every 
facility and every specialized unit, taking into 
account the physical layouts, safety, and service 
needs of the population. For example, jails  
like those at Rikers with longer hallways and  
bad sightlines need more staff than newer 
facilities designed with cells clustered around 
common areas. 
Budget requests should be based off DOC’s 
internal analyses. However, it is unclear that 
such analyses exist for all divisions of the 
Department. In fact, when the Federal Monitor 
hired a long-time correction expert to develop 
one (in the absence of DOC producing one 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

66
itself), the expert was flummoxed by the lack 
of information about staff assignments, and 
effectively concluded a proper analysis was 
not feasible.152 Now, apparently, the State 
Commission on Correction is doing an analysis, 
but only of one jail.153 While welcome, that is 
not enough. And until that analysis is complete 
Department-wide, it is hard to understand how 
staffing and budget decisions are being made. 
We recognize that measures like officer-to-
incarcerated-person ratios are at best a rough 
proxy for adequate staffing. What works in one 
facility or jurisdiction may not work in another. 
Nor are most U.S. jails or prisons sufficiently 
staffed to provide real safety and services, so 
comparisons with those institutions may not be 
appropriate. However, the officer to incarcerated 
person ratio at Rikers is indicative of just how 
much money is being spent by DOC today – with 
very poor returns. DOC’s annual total budget is 
proposed to be $2.875 billion in FY26, or more 
than $400,000 per incarcerated person.154 
DOC has 6,021 uniformed staff for a jail 
population of 6,760–or a ratio of 0.89 correction 
officers for every incarcerated person.155 That is 
one of the most richly staffed jails in the country. 
The average jail in the United States has 0.25 
officers for every incarcerated person.156 
The Federal Bureau of Prisons is budgeted for 
0.13 officers for every incarcerated person.157 In 
Scandinavia, there is a ratio of 1 officer—or on 
occasion, even more—for every incarcerated 
person. However, officers there are often trained 
in social work and other therapeutic practices. 
They provide programming and support beyond 
supervision. In contrast, at Rikers, civilians not 
officers generally provide those services.  
Even though Rikers is richly staffed on paper, 
that does not tell the full story. On a given day, 
7% of staff are out sick, 5% are on modified 
status, barring them from working directly with 
incarcerated people, and another 6% are on 
some form of leave (vacation, FMLA, military 
service, etc.).158 That leaves just over 4,900 
uniformed staff actually available to work, a 
ratio of 0.73 officers for every incarcerated 
person. Uniformed staff who are available are 
often poorly allocated. For instance, some are 
assigned to what could be civilian roles, where 
they do not actually interface with people in 
custody. All this contributes to the paradox of 
understaffing in the facilities, where no matter 
how many people are available in theory, too 
few are around to escort people and consistently 
staff other necessary posts. That puts everyone 
in the jails at unnecessary risk.
0.73 1
A V A I L A B L E  U N I F O R M E D  S TA F F  
F O R  E V E R Y  1  I N C A R C E R AT E D  
P E R S O N  AT  R I K E R S
TO
4,900
6,760
A V A I L A B L E  
U N I F O R M E D  S TA F F
AT  R I K E R S
R I K E R S  
P O P U L AT I O N
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

67
Looking ahead to the borough-based jails 
and secure hospital beds, DOC must calibrate 
staffing to be efficient and effective. Each 
floor and operational plan should be carefully 
assessed and staff allocated as needed. Union 
contracts, State and City regulations must 
be considered, though arbitrary or outdated 
mandates should not be permitted to drive 
unreasonable staffing allocations. 
As the new facilities’ floor and operational 
plans are not available yet, it is difficult for 
our Commission to be precise as to staffing 
needs. That said, the new buildings should be 
much more efficient than Rikers. Instead of 
long corridors, blind spots, and deteriorating 
conditions, the modern jails to come will have 
safer, smarter layouts with few blind spots 
(supplemented by large numbers of cameras), 
programming and medical space on many of the 
units or at least on the same floor, and recreation 
space in every unit. Furthermore, we project an 
average daily system-wide population of roughly 
4,500 people, a significant decrease from today.  
Therefore, we think it reasonable for DOC to 
be able staff the new system, using a direct 
supervision model, at a staffing ratio similar 
to its true ratio today: 0.72 officers for every 
incarcerated person. For a jail population of 
4,500, that would mean 3,240 uniformed staff. 
The number of civilian staff available to work in 
the jails could even remain the same as today: 
1,746 budgeted positions.159 Roughly 1,500 
civilians are actually on payroll today. 
K.
L.
Adequate Staffing in New Borough-Based Facilities and Operational Savings
Design State-of-the-Art Facilities that Encourage Positive Behavior
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
The importance of design goes well beyond the 
need to replace the crumbling, decrepit facilities 
on Rikers Island. Good design can facilitate 
better relationships between officers and people 
in custody, increase feelings of trust and respect, 
ensure adequate dedicated space to meet the 
needs of those working and held in the facilities, 
and allow for freedom of movement to the fullest 
extent possible.
In our first report, we laid out a series of key 
design principles that should be incorporated into 
the facilities; we briefly reiterate those principles 
here. At the same time, we stress the need to 
engage those directly impacted by the design 
in thinking through what these facilities should 
look like, including people currently or formerly 
in custody and their families, correctional staff, 
medical and civilian staff, service providers, 
parole officers, and defense attorneys. 
Direct supervision should be central to the design 
of the new facilities, something DOC appears 
to be pursuing, based on the jail designs made 
public to date. Direct supervision is exemplified 
by clear sightlines across central dayrooms that 
are surrounded by residential pods. This enables 
officers posted in the dayrooms to view everyone 
housed in the units at the same time, and breaks 
down both physical and metaphorical barriers 
between them. These units also should have 
direct access to outdoor recreation. 
A direct supervision approach bolsters 
opportunities for officers to build constructive 
relationships with incarcerated people. This 
will help officers identify and meet the needs 
of those in their care, while also anticipating 
potential problems or conflicts. Importantly, 
direct supervision facilities reduce staffing 
needs, enabling officers to be deployed more 
judiciously and effectively. 
The facilities themselves should be built 
around a town center accessible directly from 
housing units, designed to meet the medical, 

68
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
mental health, programming, legal, and other 
needs of people in custody. The town centers 
should include clinical space for both physical 
and mental health providers, and a pharmacy 
where those in custody can readily receive their 
needed medications. Dedicated programming 
space that is flexible enough to accommodate 
multiple types of current and future programs 
and technologies is essential. 
The facilities should utilize normalized fixtures 
and furnishings wherever possible. They should 
be designed to reduce noise, increase access 
to natural light, regulate temperatures, and 
generally provide comfortable, high-quality, and 
well-maintained spaces for both staff and people 
in custody. Using normalized, secure furnishings 
in place of steel can reduce noise and ease  
cold temperatures. 
Visitation rooms should be comfortable, 
naturalized spaces that facilitate positive 
interactions between people in custody and  
their loved ones, including especially children. 
These units should be staffed by specially 
trained officers who have volunteered for 
the position. Where physical visitation is not 
possible, increased use of technology can a 
llow for more virtual visitation, including via 
tablet within individual cells.
Critically, current designs should be reviewed 
to ensure that there is full access to sufficient 
outdoor space – outside of just the housing  
units themselves – and sufficient daylight  
access through windows. Further, staff 
consistently identified that equally important 
to the borough jails’ design, is the facilities’ 
ability to function effectively. Designs should 
maximize ease of maintenance. There must 
also be commitment by the City to performing 
appropriate maintenance and repair. Particularly 
in a vertical environment, ensuring that elevator 
maintenance, for instance, and other repairs are 
prioritized and that facilities are not allowed to 
fall into a state of disrepair is essential. 
Both the NYC Department of Correction and the 
New York State Commission of Correction, which 
approves plans for the new facilities, must make 
these design principles foundational to their 
design and approval process.  

THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Borough-Based System Will Save  
Over $2 Billion Per Year Once Up  
and Running
69
IX.

70
Once opened, the safer, more efficient borough-based system we 
recommend, with 5,000 total beds, will save New York City over 
$2.4 billion annually in operating and overtime costs. In contrast, 
the City will owe $1.24 billion in annual bond payments for the 
system’s construction, a net savings of $1.2 billion annually, once 
the new system is up and running.
Construction of a safer, more efficient borough-
based system, including the 500 new locked 
forensic psychiatric beds we call for here, will 
be paid for by bonding out the costs over 30 
years, much like a home mortgage. We estimate 
the savings from leaving behind the multi-
billion dollar failure of Rikers will significantly 
outweigh the construction costs of bringing the 
system online – even with the major increases 
in cost since the pandemic struck. We project 
New York City will net $960 million per year in 
savings, once the new borough system is fully 
operational and Rikers is closed, with potential 
for more.160 This coming fiscal year, the City  
has proposed spending $2.87 billion on  
Rikers, or over $400,000 per incarcerated 
person per year.161 
Total Annual Operating Savings in New Borough-Based System:  
At Least $2.4 Billion
	
F Operational savings: Smaller staffing ratios 
and operational efficiencies made possible  
by smarter, safer design and more central 
locations for a smaller jail population will 
save $2.09 billion a year, indexed for 
inflation, once the borough-based system  
is up and running in full.162 
	
F Overtime savings: If DOC could reduce 
overtime to even the average amount 
spent per uniformed staff person in the five 
years prior to COVID, NYC would save an 
additional $357 million annually, indexed  
for inflation.163 
	
F Health Care and Re-entry Savings: New York 
State should apply for a Section 1115 Waiver 
for Medicaid to reimburse most treatment 
and re-entry preparation costs during the 
last 90 days of a person’s incarceration. As 
the average length of stay has averaged 96 
days over the past six months, if approved, 
NYC could save tens of millions from the 
Correctional Health Services current budget 
$300 million annual budget.164 Those savings 
could be realized well before the borough 
jails are open. Even without a waiver, as of 
January 1, 2025, the City can bill Medicaid 
for medical treatment of incarcerated people 
under 21 and many former foster care youth 
up to age 26, for the entire duration of 
their incarceration. While the Department 
of Correction was not able to provide the 
number of qualifying formerly foster care 
youth in custody, over 330 18-20 year olds 
are in Rikers as of the time of publication.165    
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
IX.

71
Total Annual Debt Service Costs to Build Borough-Based System:  
$1.24 Billion
	
F Capital costs for jails + secure outposted 
beds: NYC has allocated $15.5 billion in 
capital costs for 4 new borough facilities, and 
$910 million for approximately 350 outposted 
beds.166 This will require $1.19 billion in annual 
debt service costs.167 
	
F Capital costs for 400 additional secure 
forensic psychiatric beds: $640 million  
in capital costs will be required.168 This  
will require $46 million in annual debt  
service costs.169
As mentioned earlier in this report, the NYC 
Department of Design and Construction has 
estimated that rebuilding the decrepit jails on 
Rikers would cost up to 15% more than building 
borough-based jails, and would take years 
longer, adding to the reasons why remaining on 
Rikers is unacceptable. 
For many years, DOC officers trained primarily 
out of a Queens strip mall with poor facilities. 
That was unacceptable. Our Commission has 
called repeatedly for a new training facility. The 
City responded by setting aside $225 million, 
which has been sitting dormant for four years 
as the City searched for an adequate site. 
Thankfully, since 2023, DOC has been able to 
use the state-of-the-art NYPD training academy 
for classroom and fitness-related training. 
Jail-based training takes place on Rikers at 
a shuttered jail. We know of no reason DOC 
cannot continue to use the NYPD academy. That 
said, once Rikers closes, DOC will need new 
space for hands-on jail training. Wherever that is 
developed, it will not necessitate $225 million. 
The money saved could be reallocated to pay for 
other aspects of the borough-based system.
F U N D I N G  F O R  D O C  T R A I N I N G  A C A D E M Y 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Invest Deeply in Communities  
with Borough Jails
72
X.

73
NYC should invest deeply in the neighborhoods housing the  
new borough jails, especially Chinatown and Mott Haven, 
including fulfilling the 2019 Points of Agreement. 
The communities around the new borough 
facilities are bearing a serious construction 
burden for the sake of us all. In Chinatown, 
Downtown Brooklyn, and Kew Gardens, new  
jails are being built on the footprint of old 
borough jails. In Mott Haven, the jail is going up 
on the site of a former NYPD tow pound. People 
in those neighborhoods must live through years 
of construction, often with extended hours. Many 
have urged that the jail be smaller. Fortunately, 
as our Commission found in 2019, the evidence 
clearly demonstrates that once built,  
borough-based jails have had no observable 
impact on property values or crime rates. 
Many in these neighborhoods have urged 
that the jails be smaller. We closely examined 
that prospect, keeping in mind that Rikers 
absolutely must close. However, there is no 
reasonable way to significantly reduce the 
size of the borough jails without sacrificing 
needed bed space, or cutting vital medical 
clinic, rehabilitative programming, or recreation 
space. The only other option to substantially 
reduce the size of the four jails already being 
developed, would be to try to find a new site 
for at least a fifth borough-based jail, if not a 
sixth. Given the billions of dollars and years that 
would entail, the disruption to the design and 
construction processes already underway, and 
the very difficult political consequences of siting 
additional jails, this approach would effectively 
ensure Rikers remains open for years to come. 
We cannot in good faith recommend such a path. 
We do strongly encourage the City to take all 
reasonable steps to ameliorate the construction 
and operational impact of the facilities.170 For 
instance, as discussed earlier in this report, 
the City can shorten construction timelines by 
at least a year by starting the foundations and 
exteriors of the jails even as the interior designs 
are finalized, and using value engineering. The 
City could also lease nearby garage space for 
staff’s personal vehicles (even while incentivizing 
staff to take public transportation). 
Critically, the City should further invest in the 
vitality of these four communities, boosting 
neighborhood businesses, green spaces, 
and resources. That includes meeting all 
the promises made in the 2019 Points of 
Agreement, entered into at the time the 
Council approved the jails. We also urge the 
Administration to continue regular engagement 
with the local communities, reporting to 
them regularly about construction progress, 
environmental and noise conditions, and 
ensuring that a wide swath of community 
members have access to any meetings or 
information being disseminated. 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
X. 

THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Commit to and Start Master 
Planning for Renewable Rikers
74
XI.

75
For our Commission’s initial 2017 report, we 
examined more than thirty redevelopment 
possibilities for Rikers Island after the jails close. 
Most options, like affordable housing or various 
forms of commercial development, had to be 
eliminated due to limitations that remain today: 
Rikers is 80% decaying landfill, isolated from 
the rest of the city, and subject to atypical noise 
levels and strict height restrictions due to its 
proximity to LaGuardia Airport. 
An option rose to the fore, a way to convert 
the 413-acre island’s isolation from a challenge 
to a strength: build essential, yet difficult-
to-site infrastructure like a massive sewage 
treatment plant, composting, solar power, 
and battery storage.171 That vision became 
the basis for Renewable Rikers, a goal 
endorsed by environmental and criminal justice 
organizations, faith groups, and impacted 
communities across the city. 
Compelling evidence – including two feasibility 
studies completed by New York City in 2024 
– demonstrates that Renewable Rikers is the 
highest and best use of the island after the 
jails close. The studies found that Renewable 
Rikers would create hundreds of jobs, generate 
millions of dollars of business, and save New 
York City $10 billion in operational and repair 
costs for existing aging infrastructure.
Renewable Rikers would significantly advance 
New York City’s commitment to health, safety 
and equity, such as helping relieve long-
disadvantaged South Bronx and Queens 
neighborhoods from the burdens of foul sewage 
treatment plants and raw sewage pouring into 
waterfronts when it rains significantly. New York 
City could reimagine existing sewage treatment 
plants in those neighborhoods (and on Randalls 
Island), possibly adapting them to public use (like 
parks), or opening up waterfronts closed to the 
public for decades. Sites that have historically 
been a massive burden on surrounding 
neighborhoods could be engines for growth.172
Renewable Rikers is also one of the only ways 
New York City can meet its essential clean 
air and clean water goals. New York City has 
set critical environmental goals that will be 
incredibly difficult to meet without the use of 
the 413 acres on Rikers. Those goals include 
eliminating compostable waste from landfills 
by 2030, transforming our electricity grid from 
90% powered by fossil fuels to 100% powered 
by zero-emissions resources by 2040, becoming 
carbon neutral by 2050, and ending the flow 
of raw sewage into our rivers and bays when it 
rains by 2060. With the climate crisis worsening, 
we cannot afford to delay investments central 
our city’s future. Renewable Rikers can set a 
standard for a justice-driven, comprehensive 
approach to climate adaptation.
In short, Renewable Rikers is a remarkable 
constellation of victories waiting to be seized.  
The City should fully embrace Renewable 
Rikers as the post-jails future of Rikers Island,  
and begin master planning.
NYC should commit to transforming Rikers Island post-jails into a 
hub for essential yet difficult-to-site environmental infrastructure 
– a Renewable Rikers – which City feasibility studies confirm is the 
highest and best use of the land.
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
XI.

76
In 2021, the City Council pushed forward the Renewable Rikers vision by passing a trio of bills 
known collectively as the Renewable Rikers Act. The bills:
Source: Independent Rikers Commission
A. Passage of the Renewable Rikers Act
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
A view of Rikers Island 
transformed as a future 
hub for renewable energy, 
wastewater treatment, and 
organic waste processing.
	
F Established that by August 31, 2027,  
Rikers “shall no longer be used by the 
department of correction for the housing  
of incarcerated persons.”173 
	
F Created a Rikers Island Advisory Committee, 
including directly impacted people and 
City agency leaders, to evaluate and make 
recommendations regarding prospective 
uses of Rikers Island for sustainability and 
resiliency purposes.177 
 
	
F Required feasibility studies regarding 
potential wastewater,175 renewable energy, 
and battery storage176 infrastructure on Rikers. 
	
F Mandated that every six months, the Mayor 
transfer from the Department of Correction 
(DOC) to the Department of Citywide 
Administrative Services (DCAS) any building 
or land on Rikers not in active use for 
the housing of incarcerated people or to 
provide direct services to them. The entire 
island has to be transferred from DOC to 
DCAS by August 31, 2027.174  

77
The mandated wastewater and energy feasibility studies were released by the NYC Department 
of Environmental Protection (DEP) and NYC Mayor’s Office of Climate and Environmental Justice 
(MOCEJ) in March 2024. The Administration’s feasibility studies concluded that Renewable Rikers 
would be a massive benefit to New York City environmentally, economically, and budgetarily. 
Among the gains the feasibility studies identified:
	
F A modern wastewater treatment plant on 
Rikers could serve 3 million New Yorkers 
and treat as much sewage as four nearby 
decades-old, often-overwhelmed treatment 
plants combined—Hunts Point, Wards Island, 
Bowery Bay, and Tallman Island. 
	
F Those four plants are among the oldest in 
the city, built between 1937 and 1952. 
	
F The four plants need $34 billion in upgrades 
and maintenance over the coming decades. 
	
F For the very same $34 billion, New York 
City could instead build a state-of-the-art 
treatment plant on Rikers that could do the 
same job much more efficiently. 
	
F A modern plant on Rikers would save 
taxpayers $10 billion in operating and 
maintenance costs vs. trying to sustain the 
four surrounding decades-old plants. 
	
F A modern treatment plant on Rikers could 
help slash the amount of raw sewage that 
pours into NYC’s waterways when it rains. 
That could transform waterfronts and 
majorly advance the goal of eliminating  
the flow of raw sewage into waterways  
by 2060.
	
F While the four existing plants would likely be 
used in part as pumping stations (to send 
sewage via tunnels to Rikers) and to hold 
runoff during storms, their current polluting, 
smelly operations could be significantly 
reduced. Trucks that today lug out sludge 
from the plants would no longer pollute 
neighborhoods. 
	
F Rikers would be an excellent site to convert, 
generate, and store offshore wind and solar 
power, and compost waste. Some of that 
power could be sold to the grid, generating 
revenue for New York City. 
	
F Renewable energy technologies on Rikers 
could reduce CO2 emissions by 7.5 million 
tons—equivalent to taking 1.7 million cars  
off the road.
	
F Renewable Rikers would create hundreds 
of construction and permanent green jobs, 
adding tens of millions of dollars to our  
local economy. 
B. City Feasibility Studies Confirm Renewable Rikers Is Highest and Best Use  
for Rikers Island
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

78
About 60% of New York City has a combined sewer system, which collects wastewater and 
stormwater in a single pipe. When heavy rain overwhelms this system, raw sewage flows into 
the city’s waterways. This poses severe public health risks, limits recreational water use, and 
triggers expensive legal mandates by New York State. Even though DEP has reduced combined 
sewer overflows (CSOs) by 85% since the 1980s, the City still releases 15 to 20 billion gallons of 
untreated sewage annually.178 As climate change brings increased rainfall, rising sea levels, and 
more frequent extreme weather events, these challenges will only intensify. 
The four sewage treatment plants 
surrounding Rikers, all served by a combined 
sewer system, are outdated, overburdened, 
and disproportionately contribute to water 
pollution. Together, the plants process 39% 
of New York City’s wastewater yet account 
for 55% of the total CSO volume.179 
Source: NYC Department of Environmental Preservation
Dry Weather Conditions in the Combined Sewer System
Sewer Regulator
Combined Sewer
To Wastewater Treatment Plant
Combined 
Sewer 
Outfall
Down Spout
Catch Basin
Building 
Sewer 
Connection
Wet Weather Conditions in the Combined Sewer System
Sewer Regulator
Combined Sewer
To Wastewater Treatment Plant
Combined 
Sewer 
Outfall
Down Spout
Catch Basin
Building 
Sewer 
Connection
C. Renewable Rikers Can Help Stop the Flow of Raw Sewage into NYC Waterways
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

79
Source: Regional Plan Association
WRRF
YEAR  
BUILT
CSO  
VOLUME 
2018
CAPACITY 
(MGD)
1
JAMAICA
1903/1943
1,325
100
2
CONEY ISLAND
1935
0
110
3
WARDS ISLAND
1937
3,561
275
4
TALLMAN ISLAND
1939
2,112
80
5
BOWERY BAY
1939
4,178
150
6
26TH WARD
1944
782
85
7
HUNTS POINT
1952
3,381
200
8
OWL’S HEAD
1952
3,300
120
9
ROCKAWAY 
1952
0
45
10
PORT RICHMOND
1953
597
60
11
OAKWOOD BEACH
1956
0
40
12
NEWTOWN CREEK
1967/2009
3,636
310
13
NORTH RIVER
1986
592
170
14
RED HOOK
1987
641
60
9%
15%
17%
14%
45%
M O S T  C S O S  C O M E  F R O M  P L A N T S  A R O U N D  R I K E R S
COMBINED SEWER 
OVERFLOW VOLUME 
(2018)
Wastewater Resource Recovery Facility
Sewershed Boundaries
CSO Outflow Volume  
(2018) Millions of Gallons
100 
500 
5
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

80
Strategic planning for Rikers will ensure maximum 
value for every dollar invested in stormwater 
management. A city-wide master plan to cut 
CSOs by 4 billion gallons by 2045 and virtually 
eliminate discharges by 2060 is already 
underway.180 Including Rikers Island in this master 
plan could be transformative; the feasibility study 
found a treatment plant on Rikers could handle a 
peak of 1.4 billion gallons per day during a storm, 
much more than any existing plant in the city. 
As the DEP feasibility study notes, that capacity 
could be expanded even more by integrating it 
with CSO storage tunnels, detention basins, and 
high-level interceptors, which capture wastewater 
until plants have the capacity to handle it. This 
could offset costs for other planned investments 
required under the City’s Long-Term Control Plans 
for CSOs.181 Such an interconnected system also 
provides built-in redundancy, accommodating 
urban growth and increased demands without the 
need for isolated, costly overhauls. 
For example, committing to master planning now 
could eliminate the need for some infrastructure 
investments, such as the $1 billion Flushing Bay 
CSO tunnel currently planned to run beneath 
Astoria Boulevard and connect to the Bowery 
Bay treatment plant.182 By prioritizing integrated 
planning on Rikers Island, the City can avoid 
piecemeal, smaller-scale investments in the 
Upper East Bay that would ultimately prove more 
costly and likely less effective over time.
Source: NYC DEP Feasibility Study at 47
RENEWABLE RIKERS VS. AGING EXISTING SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANTS
FEATURE
EXISTING UPPER EAST RIVER WRRFS
NEW WRRF ON RIKERS ISLAND
YEARS OF OPERATION
72-87 years
Brand new
SPACE CONSTRAINTS
Almost completely built out
Sufficient property for known needs and reserve
NEIGHBORHOOD  
IMPACTS
The four WRRFs operate in densely populated residential and 
industrial communities or parkland – including Environmental 
Justice areas
The new WRRF would benefit from the relative isolation 
of Rikers Island and would remove significant wastewater 
operations from the neighborhoods of the existing WRRFs
TRUCK TRAFFIC
Trucks necessary for transporting biosolids and trash and  
for delivery of equipment, supplies and chemicals
Reduced truck traffic due to reliance on marine transport  
as well as isolation from neighborhoods and parkland
ODOR CONTROL
Odor control systems in place but aging and proximity to 
neighborhoods and parkland increases potential
Reduced potential due to relative isolation from sensitive 
receptors and state of the art odor control technology
SOLAR ENERGY
Small solar installation planned at the Wards Island WRRF
Solar would be installed over all process tanks and roofing
BIOGAS UTILIZATION
Some biogas utilization at some WRRFs of varying degrees
Biogas utilization system will be designed into the new WRFF
STORMWATER  
MANAGEMENT
Limited opportunities to modify the current collection 
system for expanded stormwater management beyond  
CSO storage tanks
Multitasking infrastructure and a new build allows for 
increased stormwater capture upstream in the  
collections system and the use of existing WRRF  
sites for expanded flood protection
CSO REDUCTION
20 Million Gallon CSO Storage Tank planned to connect to the 
Bowery Bay WRRF, two other CSO storage tanks in operation 
that connect to the Tallman Island WRRF
CSO capture and storage solution could be integrated into the 
design of the tunnel system and/or could reduce the size of a 
storage tunnel with multitasking infrastructure
RESILIENCY
Some protective measures installed post-Superstorm  
Sandy – system is still vulnerable
Resiliency would be part of the upfront design accounting for 
flood elevations and protection of below grade assets
ORGANICS CO-DIGESTION
Co-digestion being evaluated at the Hunts Point WRFF
Co-digestion fully integrated into the design
COMPOSTING
None
Co-location of 30-acre compost facility
BIOSOLIDS QUALITY
Targeting Class B
Class A – highest quality
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION
Limited and decentralized digital infrastructure
Advanced technological capability built in – ranging from 
asset management to remote monitoring and automation
Maximized benefit
Moderate benefit
Limited benefit
D. Renewable Rikers Can Help Avoid Redundant Construction
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
R E N E W A B L E  R I K E R S  V S .  A G I N G  E X I S T I N G  S E W A G E  
T R E AT M E N T  P L A N T S

81
Healthy waterways are some of New York’s best 
assets, driving economic development, tourism, 
and revitalization.183 Long-inaccessible waterfront 
sites often associated with pollution are being 
reimagined, from the South Brooklyn Marine 
Terminal to the Gowanus Canal.184 However, 
South Bronx and Queens neighborhoods near 
Rikers remain largely disconnected from their 
waterfronts, thanks in significant part to the 
sewage treatment plants there, which foul  
the water and the air. Renewable Rikers  
could change that. 
The four existing wastewater plants near Rikers 
together cover nearly 182 acres—larger than 
the total area of Roosevelt Island and Hudson 
Yards combined. DEP’s feasibility study suggests 
that the four facilities would remain open, with a 
quarter of the sites serving as pumping stations 
to transport waste and stormwater to Rikers, 
and the rest as retention basins to temporarily 
hold stormwater before processing. Even so, 
those sites would be much less smelly and less 
polluting. Many fewer trucks would be needed  
to service the sites.
Even if much if not all the sites would still 
be needed for water treatment, the massive 
decrease in the noxiousness of the sites – and 
the major reduction in raw sewage pouring into 
the waterfronts – would open up the prospect of 
new public uses above (on platforms) or adjacent 
to the plants. 
Each site presents unique planning opportunities 
that can be tailored to meet the specific needs 
of the surrounding neighborhoods. Hunts Point, 
for instance, could support expanded clean 
manufacturing and fortify food supply chains 
given its proximity to the city’s largest food 
distribution center and major freight routes. 
Similarly, Bowery Bay is situated in an industrial 
zone and could have a new future supporting 
the City’s clean energy transition. Randalls and 
Wards Islands, already home to various city 
facilities and recreational areas, could integrate 
additional public-facing uses. College Point 
is primarily residential, with Tallman Island as 
the only plant of the four that directly abuts 
residential lots, making it a good candidate for 
affordable housing or other climate-resilient 
community uses. A range of possibilities exists, 
and the City should collaboratively explore each 
site’s potential with impacted stakeholders.
Source: NYC Department of City Planning
Bowery Bay
Hunts Point
Tallman Island
Wards Island
37 acres
46 acres
31 acres
68 acres
E. Existing Sewage Treatment Sites in the South Bronx, Queens, and on Randalls 
Island Could Be Transformed
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

82
Local and foreign examples 
can be illuminating. The 
capping of North River 
Wastewater Treatment Plant 
to create the 28-acre Denny 
Farrell Riverbank State Park 
in Harlem, and DEP’s more 
recent upgrade at Newtown 
Creek, which offers waterfront 
access along the artfully 
designed Nature Walk, are 
two local case studies that 
should be considered. 
Source: Dattner Architects
The London Tideway Tunnel 
in England, which will capture 
billions of gallons of sewage, 
integrates parks (with art 
installations and kiosks)  
at multiple points along  
the River Thames.185 
Source (top): https://www.dattner.com/projects/view/riverbank-state-park/
Source (bottom): Tideway, Public Open Spaces, https://www.tideway.london/impact/open-spaces/
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

83
The next step toward realizing the Renewable 
Rikers vision is for New York City to 
expeditiously begin master planning. This 
would allow the City to flesh out the best 
combination of uses of the island, and better 
determine the full-range of benefits and costs. 
It will also make clearer the opportunities for 
development at the sites of existing sewage 
treatment plants.
We support locking in a schedule for and 
contours of master planning, including via 
legislation like Int. 1038-2024, introduced by 
Councilmember Sandy Nurse. Such legislation 
could also be a vehicle to officially commit New 
York City to Renewable Rikers. That would not 
only be smart policy, but would permit the use of 
capital funds to demolish redundant structures 
on Rikers.186 The City estimates that master 
planning would cost roughly $10 million. 
To date, despite the definitive findings from 
DEP and MOCEJ’s feasibility studies, the Adams 
Administration has yet to agree to master 
planning for Renewable Rikers or to commit to 
the Renewable Rikers concept itself, citing high 
development costs. 
While the scale of Renewable Rikers is undeniably 
ambitious, the project would actually save New 
York City billions of dollars. For instance, the 
Administration’s feasibility study found that New 
York City has to spend $34 billion no matter what 
to try to meet sewage treatment needs over the 
next several decades. That can either be spent 
trying to prolong four existing, aging sewage 
treatment plants or to build a state-of-the-art plant 
on Rikers. However, a brand new plant on Rikers 
would save taxpayers $10 billion in long-term 
operating and maintenance costs. Meanwhile, 
the City’s energy feasibility study found energy 
generation and storage on Rikers may be a 
money-maker, as the City should be able to sell 
clean power back to the grid. 
The cost argument also fails to account for the 
economic benefits of Renewable Rikers. Not 
only would the plan create hundreds of jobs 
and generate millions of dollars of business 
across New York City, but it could open up 
waterfront land for public use and possibly 
development in the South Bronx, Queens, 
and on Randalls Island. When hiring moves 
forward for construction and permanent jobs, 
special attention should be made to recruiting 
and training people from those surrounding 
neighborhoods, and people who were previously 
incarcerated or worked on Rikers.
The City would not bear the cost of Renewable 
Rikers alone or anytime soon. Renewable Rikers 
could likely leverage a diverse array of State and 
Federal funding sources.187 Costs will be spread 
over a 40-year implementation period, and 
would be paid for with bonds, further easing the 
impact of the major capital spending. 
As the feasibility studies emphasize, the 
projected costs of Renewable Rikers are still 
conceptual; additional analysis is necessary to 
fully determine the required investment and the 
best possible financing pathways. That is why 
master planning is so critical – to determine 
the optimal scope of the project, to examine 
financing, and to delve more deeply into the 
economic, environmental, and equity benefits of 
Renewable Rikers.188  
Master planning must include consultation 
with and integration of recommendations by 
the Rikers Island Advisory Committee, which 
was created via the 2021 Renewable Rikers 
Act.189 Under that law, the Advisory Committee 
is required to release its recommendations for 
using Rikers for sustainability and resiliency 
purposes by the summer of 2025. 
F. Master Planning for Renewable Rikers is the Necessary Next Step
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

84
Local Law 16 of 2021, part of the Renewable 
Rikers Act, mandates that every six months the 
Mayor transfer from DOC to DCAS “every portion 
of Rikers Island” that is “not in active use for  
the housing of incarcerated persons, or in  
active use for the providing of direct services  
to such persons.” 
So far, the only transfers made were in 
December 2021, in the waning days of the de 
Blasio Administration. The transfer were: the 
James A. Thomas Center (JATC), Rikers’ first 
permanent jail, which was closed over a decade 
ago; and 43 acres of vacant land on the eastern 
and northern sides of the island. No transfers 
have taken place since.
We urge the City to comply with this legal 
mandate and turn over any land or buildings 
that are no longer in active use by DOC. The 
Administration should also make public the 
evaluation of the buildings and land on Rikers  
it is required to undertake every six months 
under the law. 
The City should develop a demolition timeline 
as part of the master planning process. Rolling 
demolition as jails close would allow for early 
geotechnical studies and environmental 
testing to proceed, helping identify potential 
challenges and ensure more accurate budgeting 
and scheduling. This includes addressing 
whether areas might require special foundation 
treatments due to the island’s landfill history, as 
well as any risks posed by that landfill—such as 
methane emissions or carcinogens—that would 
require remediation. 
G.
H.
Swift Transfer of Land on Rikers
Planning for Demolition and Remediation
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
I.
Developing Interim Renewable Uses on Rikers Island 
Renewable Rikers would be designed and built 
in phases over the next few decades. As that 
proceeds (as developed via master planning), 
the City could proactively utilize available land 
on Rikers for interim, modular, scalable projects 
to deliver near-future energy savings, waste 
reduction, enhanced environmental quality, and 
job creation. State and private funds could help 
pay the cost. Interim uses would demonstrate 
the City’s commitment to Renewable Rikers. As 
more jails are retired and the redevelopment 
progresses, these projects could be expanded, 
modified, or decommissioned based on  
long-term planning efforts. 
For instance, the 43 acres of vacant land on 
Rikers that have already been transferred from 
DOC to DCAS could be used today for modular, 
portable projects such as solar arrays and 
battery storage. Solar canopies could be put 
over existing parking lots. The power generated 
could be used to offset energy needs for the 
remaining jails (most of which is provided today 
by a fossil fuel-powered plant on Rikers itself). 
Rikers could expand its existing composting 
facility. Rikers is strategically located near three 
major marine waste transfer stations, Harlem 
River, 91st Street, and North Shore, which 
collectively handle over 30% of the City’s solid 
waste. Organic waste could be brought to  
Rikers by barge. 

85
As planning and phased re-development of 
Rikers Island progresses, consultation with 
surrounding communities, especially those 
historically impacted by the jail system and 
nearby noxious infrastructure, will be critical. 
To ensure accountability and transparency 
throughout the redevelopment, the City should 
establish a detailed planning schedule and 
provide regular progress reports to the City 
Council and the public. This reporting framework 
should include robust accountability measures, 
such as measurable success indicators, 
transparent decision-making processes, and 
consistent community engagement. 
J. Public Reporting and Community Engagement
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Source: Seth Wenig/AP

THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Appoint Two Senior, Full-Time  
Officials Dedicated to Closure  
and Transformation
86
XII.

87
Two Senior Point People must be appointed to lead the effort 
outlined here full-time: a full-time senior point person at City Hall 
whose sole mission is to close Rikers, and a full-time senior point 
person at DOC whose sole mission is preparing DOC to transition 
to the borough facilities. 
Closing Rikers requires the cooperation and 
coordination of numerous City agencies and 
State partners to achieve major goals when 
it comes to construction, safe jail population 
reduction, remaking the Department of 
Correction, and planning for Renewable Rikers. 
A senior leader with real clout who is solely 
focused on closing Rikers is critical. To date, 
responsibility for closing Rikers has been diffuse 
and numerous senior officials have taken turns 
as the “point person.” The effort would benefit 
from having one strong leader who can oversee 
the various strands of the effort full-time, without 
being pulled away to deal with other aspects of 
their remit. 
Legislation establishing such a position, perhaps 
confirmed by City Council, should be considered. 
Sufficient funding should be provided to ensure 
the leader can hire staff dedicated solely to 
this task, including for instance senior deputies 
focused on each key area, from safe population 
reduction, to new facilities, to DOC culture and 
operations, to Renewable Rikers.
We expect the senior point person would: 
	
F Regularly bring together stakeholders at the 
City and State level to assess progress and 
coordinate action; 
	
F Produce frequent public reports on the City’s 
progress toward and detailed data regarding 
the closure of Rikers; and 
	
F Establish a schedule for the phased closure 
and demolition of jails on Rikers as the 
population is safely lowered and the new 
borough facilities open. 
Similarly, the Department of Correction should 
have an internal senior official (likely at the 
Deputy Commissioner level), with a dedicated 
team, whose sole jobs are to prepare DOC for 
the transition to the borough-based system. 
That must run from updated training to staffing 
analysis and allocation to operational and cultural 
shifts, all with an eye toward ensuring the deep 
problems that exist today are not moved into the 
new facilities. That official’s progress should be 
part of the regular public reporting. 
Our Commission would support any related role 
that the Council might play, including legislating 
these positions, confirming the Close Rikers 
point person to their position, holding  
regular oversight hearings, and convening  
or co-convening key stakeholders. 
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
XII.
Source: John Moore/Getty

THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Conclusion
88

89
AT  A  C R O S S R O A D S  W I T H  A  C L E A R  C H O I C E
Ultimately, when it comes to Rikers, our City has three choices before it. 
	
F Spend the money and political capital necessary to methodically and carefully build out 
facilities, fill service gaps, and remake the Department of Correction to increase public 
safety, improve individual outcomes, and safely lower the jail population, as outlined in this 
report. That will bring the Rikers jail complex to a necessary close and open up the land for 
transformation into Renewable Rikers. 
	
F Fail to address public safety sufficiently and build even more jail capacity in the borough.  
That will invite vociferous opposition, drive up costs by billions, and keep Rikers open for  
years longer. 
	
F Keep the disastrous public safety and fiscal failure that is Rikers open, subjecting staff and 
incarcerated people to horrendous, profoundly dangerous conditions indefinitely, dragging 
down attempts to increase safety in the City, and violating the law. 
Anything but number one would be an abdication of responsibility. 
This blueprint provides the path to follow to succeed. Our Commission looks forward to working with 
all stakeholders in the immediate and longer-term to push this plan forward. We have little doubt of 
success. When New Yorkers set a goal, we meet it. And we will here. 
Closing Rikers is a public safety issue, a fiscal responsibility issue, and a moral issue. The Rikers Island 
jails are accelerators of human misery that put staff and incarcerated people at profound risk, hurt 
public safety and our communities, cost billions, and disproportionately impact low-income Black and 
Brown communities. It is long past time to close the Rikers jails, once and for all removing that stain 
from the soul of our great city.
THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
Source: Bebeto Matthews/AP

APPENDIX A
A MORE JUST NYC | INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
90

91
APPENDIX A: ADDITIONAL METHODS TO SAFELY 
LOWER THE JAIL POPULATION
APPENDIX A
As mentioned in the body of this report, there are multiple paths to safely lower the jail population. 
We discuss several above, which we urge City and State leaders to prioritize and begin to invest 
in and phase in immediately. As those come on-line, their impact should be frequently and closely 
assessed to ensure progress toward safely and surgically removing people from the jail population 
who do not need to be there to ensure public safety. 
The following additional programs, investments, and approaches complement the above 
recommendations, and provide further methods to safely and smartly address crime, and reoffending, 
and thereby lower the jail population. Other examples can be found in our Commission’s prior 
reports,190 and in the Commission on Community Reinvestment & the Closure of Rikers Island. 
During the pandemic, we witnessed an unintentional social experiment. Street homeless clients 
with serious mental illness being served by our mobile treatment teams were offered housing 
in empty hotel rooms. Their overall wellness improved dramatically. Not only did they have 
a safe and clean place to lay their heads at night – along with a phone, a shower, and a 
microwave – they had better engagement with treatment teams, easier access to medication, 
and no longer felt chronically criminalized.
-  J E S S I C A  K L AV E R ,  P H . D. , 
  C H I E F  P R O G R A M  O F F I C E R ,  C A S E S
Open 500 no- to low-barrier emergency housing beds with services on-site, including at least 250 
beds dedicated to people with serious mental illness. During COVID, 800 emergency, low-barrier 
beds were opened in hotels for people released from Rikers and State prisons who had nowhere 
safe to go. The facilities provided services on-site, including specialized locations to meet the needs 
of women, people with serious mental illness, and others. Hundreds of people were connected with 
services, transitional and permanent housing, secured employment, and reconnected with their 
families, while arrest rates were lower than City shelters.191 With more time to plan, these results could 
be improved upon. 
As the pandemic ebbed, MOCJ has moved funding for those beds into transitional housing.192 While 
there is a substantial need for transitional housing (above and beyond the currently budgeted 1,000 
beds), this reallocation has left very few emergency beds for people facing criminal charges. Thus, 
often the only housing option reasonably available for someone at arraignments (their first court 
appearance) is a shelter.
1.
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

92
3.
Add 500 transitional housing beds with services on-site, including at least 250 beds dedicated to 
people with serious mental illness.193 The next step beyond emergency housing, transitional housing  
beds have proven successful at stabilizing people, enabling them to find jobs and permanent 
housing. The City currently funds 1,000 transitional housing beds, though not all are yet on-line. 
Strong local opposition from community members and elected officials has led to the Adams 
Administration canceling two leases for around 150 of the 1,000 budgeted beds. Even if all the beds 
were open, the need exceeds capacity. For instance, the Fortune Society operates 360 transitional 
beds, but reported to our Commission that it has a waitlist of 574 people.  
All the currently open beds are for single adults (one of the canceled leases was for women and 
children). However, of the 1,900 people the Fortune Society screened for transitional housing last 
year, 1,100 had children, and of the 535 people Fortune housed, 275 had children. Yet, none were 
able to reunite with their children while in the housing. Studies demonstrate a positive connection 
between family reunification and lower rates of reoffending.194 Everyone in transitional housing should 
be provided with discharge planning.   
Expand programs to connect people released from arraignments with services. Every reasonable 
intercept point should be used to try to direct people returning to the community with appropriate 
services, such as mental health peers and treatment, drug detoxification and medically managed 
withdrawal, safe havens, and more. For instance, a pilot project in Manhattan operated by CASES, 
known as the Rapid Response Treatment Pilot (RRT), works in the arraignment parts to engage 
people, connect them with longer term services, and meet their immediate needs for food and 
clothing. While the average engagement with the program is only 13 days, it presents an important 
opportunity to engage a population with very complex lives. In the first year of the program, 97% of 
people engaging with RRT have avoided re-arrest while in the program. Two client stories provided 
by CASE follow, anonymized for privacy. 
2.
M AT T
Matt is a 48 year-old man who has an extensive history of misdemeanor convictions. His 
mandates on supervised release were historically unsuccessful, as he had not shown up and 
therefore was not able to receive services and support. He reported being street homeless, 
was living with a serious mental illness, and admitted both using methamphetamine and being 
open to working on decreasing use. He was not recommended for ROR and was therefore 
placed back on supervised released. The supervised release representative in court looped 
in the RRT representative, who provided Matt with basic needs such as food and clothing 
and transitioned him to the office to complete his intake. RRT later facilitated his admission to 
Bellevue Hospital to receive an appropriately high level of care for schizophrenia.
APPENDIX A
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

93
J U A N
Juan is a 42 year-old man who was on supervised release for multiple matters. After completing 
a nine-month sentence at Rikers, Juan was arrested three times in the span of three months for 
possession of a controlled substance, petit larceny, and assault. Juan was ordered to supervised 
release, who then referred Juan to RRT due to his history and presumed need for reentry 
support. The RRT representative spoke to the client and was able to persuade him to go to the 
Bronx office together immediately. The following Friday, RRT escorted the client to the Common 
Pantry where he was able to collect groceries and begin the process of obtaining proper ID to 
help with benefits, after which Juan began meeting with his supervised release community team 
member as scheduled.
Atlas programs, operated by United Way in conjunction with community partners, are another 
example. Atlas provides voluntary, non-court mandated programs such as family counseling for  
14-27 years old at elevated risk of violence, trauma-informed cognitive-behavioral intervention,  
and paid, extended transitional employment for men 25 and older at the highest risk of serious 
violence involvement, including gun violence. Over the past two years, 91% of participants who  
have completed Atlas’s family counseling had no pretrial VFO rearrest; 68% had no pretrial rearrest  
of any kind.195
Provide family reunification & wraparound support for 500 people recently released from jail, to  
reduce reliance on shelters and lower reoffending. One example is the Osborne Association’s 
Kinship Re-entry Program. Based on the kinship foster care model, the program provides families 
$500 per month, counseling, and peer-led support services to help them house returning loved ones. 
Recently released participants must enroll in a re-entry program. Osborne reports virtually zero  
re-arrests among the over 200 people who have participated since the program began in 2021.196  
Provide at least 1,000 dedicated permanent housing vouchers for people leaving Rikers, or who 
are in emergency or transitional housing. Today, most people don’t qualify for housing vouchers 
unless they are in City shelters. Correctional Health Services and the Department of Homeless 
Services should collaborate to identify people who are homeless and connect them with housing 
vouchers before they leave Rikers. Today, those people are required to enter shelters, usually for 
months, before they qualify for a voucher. The NYC Office of Management and Budget projects 1,000 
dedicated vouchers would cost the City $30 million per year. In comparison, per the NYC Comptroller, 
it would cost almost $50 million per year to house 1,000 people in NYC shelters.
Provide incentives for landlords & brokers to accept formerly incarcerated people as tenants, 
including assistance with minor repairs, paperwork, and deposits. While a new law, Fair Chance for 
Housing, went into effect on January 1, 2025, barring housing discrimination against someone who was 
incarcerated, that is unlikely to be enough – at least in the near term. Positive incentives should also be 
offered. These could include educational sessions and incentives for landlords and brokers to accept 
formerly incarcerated people with vouchers as tenants, including assistance with minor repairs and with 
the voucher bureaucracy. The City should explore ways to boost efforts like Anthos|Home, which works 
to place homeless people with vouchers in housing, some of whom have been in jail and prison. 
4.
5.
6.
APPENDIX A
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

94
Provide early holistic assessments of incarcerated people. Everyone incarcerated after their 
Supreme Court arraignment should be offered a holistic needs assessment within 14 days. That 
should include assessing people’s mental and physical health, substance use, potential intellectual 
disability, domestic violence and abuse histories—and those factors’ potential role in the alleged 
offense. Those assessments should then inform charging, detention, release, and plea decisions. The 
Center for Justice Innovation is working with the Mayor’s Office of Criminal Justice and court partners 
to provide early assessments to more people, though the program is in its early stages. 
Provide court and case explainers for incarcerated people, crime victims, and family members. We 
heard repeatedly during our discussions and focus groups with stakeholders, including crime victims 
and currently and formerly incarcerated people and their families, that the criminal case process 
can be confusing and opaque. Court hearings often proceed quickly, in language that can sound 
like code. Along the lines of OCA’s successful Court Navigator program in Housing Court, system 
navigators could be available at arraignments, including Supreme Court arraignments, to speak with 
people facing charges, their families, and crime victims. System stakeholders could cooperatively 
develop standardized explainers for distribution. Any materials or explanations should take into 
account possible low literacy levels, dyslexia, intellectual or other developmental disabilities, and 
other relevant challenges.   
Establish Population Review Teams. Used successfully around the country, Population Review 
Teams bring all players in the justice system together to collaboratively examine individual cases, 
determine whether people can be safely diverted, or whether their cases can be resolved once and 
for all. In NYC, they could be borough-specific, and work across geographic lines when people have 
cases in multiple boroughs. Special attention should be paid to women, given their unique needs, and 
the frequency with which abuse they have suffered plays a role in their criminal cases. 
Clear warrants and I-Cards from day one of a person’s incarceration, so no one is kept in NYC jails 
a day longer than necessary. Roughly 100 people at Rikers are held solely on warrants from other 
counties or states, or because the NYPD wants to question them as part of an open investigation. In 
the latter case, the NYPD provides DOC with what is called an I-Card, stating the police would like to 
interview the person. In either case, the person will be kept in DOC custody, even after their criminal 
case ends, until the warrant and I-Card are resolved. However, sometimes, those warrants are old, 
and the jurisdiction may no longer want the person at Rikers to be extradited to it. Other times, NYPD 
no longer needs to speak with the person. If either is the case, then the warrant or I-Card should be 
vacated and the person released. 
Today, DOC staff start to examine the validity of warrants or I-Cards only after a person’s New York 
City case has been resolved. That leads to some people being held for days or weeks at Rikers 
based on a warrant or I-Card that is no longer valid. Therefore, we recommend that the Department 
of Correction screen people ordered jailed at Supreme Court arraignment for open warrants and 
I-Cards, and establish a process to contact the relevant jurisdiction to determine the status of the 
warrant and the NYPD to determine the status of the I-Card. In other words, as many such warrants 
and I-Cards should be resolved during the time someone is at Rikers dealing with their criminal case, 
rather than only once the case ends. 
7.
8.
9.
10.
APPENDIX A
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

95
Ensure there are sufficient entry-level State prison beds for specialized populations, such as people 
receiving Medication Assisted Treatment, people with a serious mental illness, and transgender 
people. Today, those people can wait for weeks or months at Rikers after being sentenced until space 
opens up in State prison to receive them. New York City bears the cost of their incarceration, though 
the delay is no fault of the City’s. Until 2009, New York State reimbursed New York City (and counties 
around the state) for anyone who remained at Rikers more than five days after being declared “state 
ready” – ready to transportation to prison. 
Pass legislation permitting incarcerated people to earn merit time credits for participating in 
educational, vocational, and rehabilitative programs while in jail. Allowing people to earn merit time 
credits off their sentences for successfully participating in educational, vocational, and rehabilitative 
programs would encourage program participation, promote good conduct, and help reduce the 
number of people serving City sentences. There is a strong body of research showing that merit 
programs reduce reoffending and incarceration, while saving money.197 Today, people in New York 
State prisons can earn time off their sentences, but people in Rikers cannot. Legislation like that 
introduced last session by Senator Cordell Cleare can help seize this currently missed opportunity. 
Increase Support for Crime Victims. Our Commission’s recent survey of crime victims in New York City, 
done together with the Alliance for Safety and Justice, found multiple failures to meet crime victims’ needs. 
Poor, young, people of color, LGBTQ individuals, homeless people, and people with criminal histories are 
most vulnerable to becoming a victim of violent crime. 
	
F Nearly one in 5 victims of violence (19%) lost a job or were demoted when they needed time off in  
the aftermath.  
	
F More than one in four victims of violent crime (26%) feared losing housing or were evicted as a  
result of crime.
	
F Only 6% of victims of violent crime reported receiving compensation from New York State’s victim 
compensation program. 
	
F Less than a third (29%) of victims of any crime and only 37% of violent crime victims reported 
receiving any mental health support or counseling. 
	
F Victims of violent crime were four times as likely to say that the criminal justice system was very 
unhelpful as they were to say it was very helpful. 
About half of NYC victims surveyed overall (52%) and half of victims of violent crimes (50%) said that 
they did not report the most serious crime they experienced to law enforcement. Interestingly, this 
matches reporting rates nationally. Data from the National Crime Victimization Survey indicate that in 
both 2013 and 2023, approximately 53% of violent crimes went unreported nationally.198 
Expand residential drug treatment beds in the jails. According to Correctional Health Services, 23% 
of the jail population, or over 1,550 people, are addicted to opioids. 28% are addicted to alcohol, or 
1,900 people. While Rikers has long been on the leading edge of medication-assisted drug treatment 
for incarcerated people, today, there are only two open units at Rikers dedicated to residential 
drug treatment: 50 beds for men and 50 beds for women. We understand that correctional staffing 
concerns prevent an expansion, and leaving a crucial intercept opportunity unseized. 
12.
13.
14.
APPENDIX A
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
11.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A MORE JUST NYC | INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
96

97
We are grateful to the Ford Foundation, the Schusterman Foundation, the Pinkerton Foundation, 
anonymous donors, and the New York City Council, whose financial support makes our work possible, 
and to the Fund for the City of New York for financial and other critical support. This report was 
prepared by Zachary Katznelson, Dana Kaplan, Lovis Nelson-Williams, and Giovana Castaneda at 
the Commission, Andrea Johnson, Erica Bond of the John Jay College of Criminal Justice, Victoria 
Lawson of the CUNY Institute for State and Local Governance, Krystal Rodriguez and Michael Rempel 
of the Data Collaborative for Justice at John Jay, Daniel Ades and Ashley Demyan of the Center 
for Justice Innovation, and Benjamin Heller and Jaeok Kim of the Vera Institute of Justice. It was 
designed by Avoq. Thanks as well to Jullian Harris-Calvin and Mary Beth Williams for their early  
work on the report. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS

ENDNOTES
A MORE JUST NYC | INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
98

99
1	
Official DOC records state only seven jails are open. However, an eighth jail is partially open: the Anna M. Kross Center 
(AMKC), the largest jail on the island, which the Department of Correction (DOC) officially closed in 2023 because it was 
in need of significant repairs, including hundreds of cell doors that did not lock properly. See testimony of then-DOC 
Commissioner Louis Molina before the New York City Council in March 2023 and before the New York City Board of 
Correction in July 2023. As the Rikers population has slowly risen over the past year and a half, DOC has slowly reopened 
hundreds of beds in AMKC. However, DOC has officially annexed those re-open units in AMKC to the next door jail, the West 
Facility. Therefore, AMKC is still technically considered closed. 
2	
Specifically, our survey found:
•	 75% of crime survivors support alternatives to incarceration such as diversion, mental health and drug treatment, and 
restorative justice.
•	 86% of all crime survivors support moving people who have mental illness and addiction issues into secure treatment 
facilities rather than jail.
•	 91% of crime survivors support speeding up trials so that defendants and victims wait less time for case resolution.
•	 65% of crime survivors support housing people awaiting trial in smaller jails near courthouses.
3	
Id. Increasing support for crime victims must be a priority for New York City and State. Our survey found: 
•	 Nearly one in 5 victims of violence (19%) lost a job or were demoted when they needed time off in the aftermath.  
•	 More than one in four victims of violent crime (26%) feared losing housing or were evicted as a result of crime.
•	 Only 6% of victims of violent crime reported receiving compensation from New York State’s victim compensation program. 
•	 Less than a third (29%) of victims of any crime and only 37% of violent crime victims reported receiving any mental health 
support or counseling. 
•	 Victims of violent crime were four times as likely to say that the criminal justice system was very unhelpful as they were to 
say it was very helpful. 
4	
Due to the wildcat strikes across most New York State prisons from mid-February through early March, all transfers from 
Rikers to state prisons have been halted until March 31, leaving over 340 people who have been convicted and sentenced to 
state prison stuck at Rikers, a number likely to continue to grow until transfers resume. Testimony of DOC before NYC Board 
of Correction (Mar. 11, 2025), available at https://www.nyc.gov/site/boc/meetings/20250311.page. That is at least 200 more 
people than are typically held at Rikers awaiting transfer to state prison. Therefore, while as of March 14, 2025, there were 
6,987 people in Rikers, a more realistic starting point for population projections is 6,800, roughly the same number as were  
in jail on February 23, 2025, the date of our jail population snapshot.
5	
Again, due to the halt in transfers from Rikers to New York State prisons because of the wildcat strikes there, the Rikers 
population today is roughly 200 people higher than it would be absent the strikes. See n.4 above. 
6  	 Only the Los Angeles County jail holds more people with mental illness.
7	
See Preliminary Mayor’s Management Report Preliminary Fiscal 2020 (Jan. 2020), available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/
operations/downloads/pdf/pmmr2020/2020_pmmr.pdf (reporting that for the first four months of FY2020, on average 15% 
of the jail population, or 1,075 people, had a serious mental illness). In comparison, in 2005, when there were 13,500 people 
in NYC jails, double the number today, 1,200 had a serious mental illness.
8	
See Testimony of Justyna Rzewinski before the New York City Board of Correction (Oct. 8, 2024), available at https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=mT9njFKspXI (starting at 22:16); Jacob Kaye, DOC boss denies knowing about Rikers’ ‘worst-kept 
secret’, Queens Daily Eagle (Nov. 13, 2024), available at https://queenseagle.com/all/2024/11/13/doc-boss-denies-knowing-
about-rikers-worst-kept-secret.
9	
See Graham Rayman, Mentally ill at Rikers often locked in cells for weeks, denied treatment, NY Daily News (Oct. 8, 2024), 
available at https://www.nydailynews.com/2024/10/08/mentally-ill-at-rikers-often-locked-in-cells-for-weeks-denied-
treatment-exclusive/; Graham Rayman, Longer Wait for Help, NY Daily News (Oct. 23, 2024), available at https://www.
yu.edu/sites/default/files/inline-files/article-OMH.pdf. 
10	 NYC Department of Correction, DOC Data Dashboard (visited Feb. 20, 2025).
11	
Preliminary Mayor’s Management Report (PMMR), Department of Correction (Jan. 2025), available at https://www.nyc.gov/
assets/operations/downloads/pdf/pmmr2025/doc.pdf.
12	 Id. 
13	
A 61st person incarcerated at Rikers died on March 16, 2025.
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
ENDNOTES

100
14	
The lack of sufficient programming was exacerbated by DOC’s decision in 2022 to cut its budget by ending $17 million in 
contracts for non-profit programming providers. In March 2024, the City announced it would spend $14 million for jail-based 
trauma-informed, substance misuse, and education programming, re-entry planning, and transportation to re-entry service 
providers. DOC released those RFPs in January 2025; they have not yet been awarded.
15	 Court appearance data from NYC Department of Correction, DOC Data Dashboard (visited Feb. 20, 2025). Less than 2% of court 
appearances are by video conference.
16	 See, e.g, NYC Council, Committee Report and Briefing Paper of the Governmental Affairs Division: Oversight – Department of 
Corrections’ [sic] Transportation of Detained Individuals to Court (May 2023), available at https://legistar.council.nyc.gov/View.as
hx?M=F&ID=12028292&GUID=E10ABAE4-5B5F-49DD-A77E-672E78C53F1D.
17	
Graham Rayman, NYC Correction Dept. set to order mandatory 12-hour tours for officers again, NY Daily News (Feb. 21, 
2025), available at https://www.nydailynews.com/2025/02/21/nyc-correction-dept-order-mandatory-12-hour-tours-officers-
again/; Status Report by the Nunez Independent Monitor (Nov. 22, 2024), available at https://tillidgroup.com/wp-content/
uploads/2024/11/2024-11-22-18th-Monitors-Report-11-22-2024.pdf at 249 (reporting DOC monthly spending on overtime was at 
its highest at any point since 2019, higher even than during the height of COVID when DOC experienced massive absenteeism); 
Status Report by the Nunez Independent Monitor (Apr. 18, 2024), available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doc/downloads/
Nunez/2024-04-18%20--%20Monitor’s%20Report.pdf at 47 (reporting “Security Team members [in restrictive housing] ... 
reportedly work overtime nearly every day, a fact that contributes to the reported exhaustion among the staff in the Department’s 
most difficult-to-manage units”); id. at 220 (“Given the Department’s problems with inefficient staff scheduling and deployment 
and abuse of leave benefits, overtime has become a routine strategy to increase staff availability on any given shift”). In Fiscal 
Year 2024, DOC spent $263.6 million on overtime, almost double its original FY 2024 budgeted amount of $132.7 million. As of 
December 2024, DOC had spent $167.7 million on overtime, already more than the $134.9 million that was originally budgeted 
for the entire fiscal year. See NYC Council, Report on the Fiscal 2026 Preliminary Plan and the Fiscal 2026 Preliminary Capital 
Commitment Plan for the Department of Correction (March 2025), available at https://legistar.council.nyc.gov/View.ashx?M=F&I
D=13786499&GUID=B4A87219-2C7D-443D-A365-3AFDC5E36A11. 
18	 Data provided to the Commission by DOC.
19	 Id. The 262 junior officers are included in the total of 2,325 officers who left the Department. 
20	 Data provided by Department of Correction Commissioner Lynelle Maginley-Liddie during testimony before NYC Council, 
Preliminary Budget Hearing, March 7, 2025, video available at https://legistar.council.nyc.gov/Calendar.aspx#. 
21	 NYC Mayor’s Office of Criminal Justice, Jail Population through January 2025, available at https://criminaljustice.cityofnewyork.
us/wp-content/uploads/2025/02/JailPop_thruJan2025.xlsx. 
22	 The most recent report by the federal court-appointed monitor in the Brad H case, which covers treatment and re-entry for 
people with mental illness at Rikers concluded in July 2024: “Delays in completing mental health assessments, [comprehensive 
treatment plans] and [discharge plans] resulted in large numbers of class members released without, or with significantly delayed, 
treatment and/or discharge plans.” Fifty-Third Regular Report of the Compliance Monitors, Brad H. v. City of New York (June 28, 
2024), available at https://mhp.urbanjustice.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/10/2024/07/Brad-H-53rd-report-final-2024_06_28-
email.pdf at 62. The monitor reported that the Department failed to produce people to mental health appointments 52% of the 
time, and failed to produce people to re-entry services 30% of the time. Id. at 27.
23	 NYC Office of Management and Budget, Department of Correction Agency Expense Preliminary Budget Summary for Fiscal Year 
2026 (Jan. 2025), available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/omb/downloads/pdf/jan25/perc1-25.pdf at 40E. DOC’s preliminary 
FY26 budget includes $1,213,205,992 for DOC operations, fringe benefits of $964,146,558, pensions of $521,577,663, and debt 
service of $168,867,055, for a total of $2,867,797,268. Id. At a population of 6,800 people, that equates to roughly $420,000 per 
incarcerated person for the year.
24	 Independent Rikers Commission, A More Just NYC (April 2017) at 89, available at https://www.morejustnyc.org/s/
LippmanCommissionReportFINALSingles.pdf. In addition, the City would have to pay approximately $920 million to demolish 
the existing jails on Rikers. In 2017, HR&A estimated that demolition of the jails on Rikers would cost approximately $145 per 
square foot, or $735 million total. We have adjusted that amount for inflation for the New York-Newark-Jersey City metropolitan 
area, pursuant to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Furthermore, the City has already signed contracts or is committed to contracts 
totaling over $15 billion for the borough jails.
25	 Though our Commission initially recommended a fifth jail in Staten Island, Mayor de Blasio decided almost immediately that the 
City would not pursue a site there. https://www.silive.com/news/2017/04/no_new_jail_for_staten_island.html
26	 The jail will be about two miles from Bronx Criminal Court. Rikers is about 8 ½ miles from the courthouse.
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
ENDNOTES

101
27	 Were any of these sites converted into a forensic treatment facility instead of a traditional jail, as Mayor Adams recently 
floated, its design would have to be revised and its completion deadline will likely need to be pushed back.
28	 Our Commission originally proposed 5,500 beds for 5,000 people. We did not specify whether any of the beds should be 
therapeutic beds, nor contemplate outposted therapeutic housing units.
29	 Proven public space improvements include creating new green spaces, increased street lighting, revitalizing empty lots, 
and removing graffiti.
30	 The original announcement of the 250 OTxHUs stated their construction would permit 250 beds to be removed from the 
borough jails. Mayor Announces Outposted Therapeutic Housing Units to Serve Patients in Custody with Serious Health 
Needs - NYC Health + Hospitals. That would have decreased the total number of jail beds from 3,544 to 3,294. However, that 
proposal was never enacted and the original RFPs for the jails maintained 3,544 beds. In 2021, the number of outposted beds 
was expanded to 393 beds, bringing system-wide capacity to 3,937 beds.	
31	
Bail reform did significantly reduce the jailing of people charged with lower-level crimes, leading to a jail population reduction 
of almost 2,000 people. Center for Court Innovation, COVID-19 and the New York City Jail Population: Summary of Major 
Trends (November 2020), available at https://www.innovatingjustice.org/sites/default/files/media/documents/2020-11/
COVID_NYC_jail-summary.pdf. But the community-based resources and supervision meant to go alongside the reforms 
have been too sparse to grapple with the profound and persistent mental health, substance use, and housing instability 
challenges many of these people have. COVID exacerbated these shortfalls, as many existing non-profits reduced services or 
shut their doors. 
	
Partially in response, bail laws have been repeatedly amended to permit bail to be set more broadly, and therefore make 
more people eligible to be incarcerated pre-trial if they cannot afford to pay the bail amount. See Peter Sterne, A (not so) 
brief guide to New York’s bail reform evolution, City and State (May 5, 2023), available at https://www.cityandstateny.com/
policy/2023/05/not-so-brief-guide-new-yorks-bail-reform-evolution/385379/. For instance, in 2022 and 2023, judges 
were given the power to set bail for people charged with causing harm to people or property (such as retail theft) if they 
have a pending case also alleging harm to people or property – even if neither case on its own would be bail eligible. While 
public data is not available to precisely state how many people are now incarcerated due to this provision, according to DOC 
data, there are over 450 people at Rikers today who are held pretrial whose most serious charge standing alone would not 
be eligible for bail, making it likely they are incarcerated pursuant to this harm-to-harm provision. That includes 58 people 
being held with the highest charge of petit larceny (Penal Law § 155.25), 55 for grand larceny in the 3rd degree (Penal Law 
§ 155.35), 93 for grand larceny in the 4th degree (Penal Law § 155.30), and 248 for burglary in the 3rd degree (Penal Law § 
140.20). Analysis of NYC Open Data, Daily Inmates in Custody, as of March 6, 2025. For more information on bail reform and 
its impact, see, e.g., Data Collaborative for Justice, Examining the System-Wide Effect of Eliminating Bail in New York City: 
A Controlled-Interrupted Time Series Study, (October 2023), available at https://datacollaborativeforjustice.org/work/bail-
reform/examining-the-system-wide-effect-of-eliminating-bail-in-new-york-city-a-controlled-interrupted-time-series-study/. 
32	 See New York State Department of Corrections and Community Supervision, New York State Department of Corrections 
and Community Supervision Expedites Less is More Act Releases Ahead of September Deadline (March 2022), available at 
https://doccs.ny.gov/system/files/documents/2022/03/3.28.2022-lim-releases.pdf. In February 2020, there were roughly 
650 people jailed in Rikers for alleged technical parole violations, including missing curfew, failing a drug test, or absconding 
from parole. Vera Institute of Justice, New York Criminal Legal System Data Hub – Jail, available at https://www.vera.org/
ny-data-hub/Jail#top. When COVID struck, parole authorities reduced that population to roughly 200 by May 2020. Id. In 
September 2021, when the Less Is More Act was signed into law, the population of people held on alleged technical parole 
violations had risen to over 270 people. Id. Today, on average, 15 or fewer people are in Rikers for alleged technical parole 
violations. Id. At the same time, the number of people on parole facing new charges at Rikers has also fallen significantly, 
from 800 people in February 2020 to fewer than 300 in February 2025. Data Collaborative for Justice, New York City Jail 
Population Tracker, available at https://nyc-jail-population-tracker.datacollaborativeforjustice.org/. 
33	 See NYC Mayor’s Office of Criminal Justice, Summary Data File, Crime, available at https://criminaljustice.cityofnewyork.us/
wp-content/uploads/2025/02/Crime_thruJan2025.xlsx; New York City Criminal Justice Agency Data Dashboard, How many 
people are arrested and prosecuted in NYC each year?, available at https://www.nycja.org/people-prosecuted
34 	 NYC Mayor’s Office of Criminal Justice, Summary Data File, Crime, available at https://criminaljustice.cityofnewyork.us/wp-
content/uploads/2025/02/Crime_thruJan2025.xlsx; NYPD Press Release, NYPD announces crime continues to decline in 
February 2025, shatters 30-year shooting record (March 3, 2025), available at https://www.nyc.gov/site/nypd/news/pr535/
nypd-crime-continues-decline-february-2025-shatters-30-year-shooting-record.
35	 NYC Mayor’s Office of Criminal Justice, Summary Data File, Crime, available at https://criminaljustice.cityofnewyork.us/wp-
content/uploads/2025/02/Crime_thruJan2025.xlsx (reporting 7,632 index crimes in February 2020); NYPD Press Release, 
NYPD announces crime continues to decline in February 2025, shatters 30-year shooting record (March 3, 2025), available 
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
ENDNOTES

102
at https://www.nyc.gov/site/nypd/news/pr535/nypd-crime-continues-decline-february-2025-shatters-30-year-shooting-
record (reporting 7,821 index crimes in February 2025).
36	 More beds might be cut as designs are finalized.
37	 This projected number reflects the number of individuals that the new facilities can hold, rather than the official forecasted 
projection of future jail populations. 
38	 Budget data provided to the Commission by the NYC Office of Management and Budget, and Correctional Health Services. 
As discussed elsewhere in this report, it is likely possible for the City to lower construction costs by using value engineering. 
On other projects, value engineering has reduced construction costs by up to 15% and also resulted in faster construction. 
The City has agreed to this process for the Manhattan jail, but declined to undertake it for the other facilities 
39	 Since 2017, we have produced an array of recommendations, with strong research backing, to make the criminal case process 
more efficient and fair, address the needs of people cycling into and out of Rikers, including specific populations such as 
women and gender non-conforming people, older adults (55+), and people facing first-time arrests who present demonstrably 
low-risk of re-offense and would experience unacceptable harm if incarcerated, offer better assessment tools to judges at 
arraignment and during the course of a case, expand the availability and use of intensive services and supervision for people 
released at arraignment, and increase public safety. We do not reiterate all those recommendations in this report, but urge 
stakeholders to read our prior reports, including: Closing Rikers Island A Roadmap for Reducing Jail in New York City (July 
2021); Path to Under 100: Strategies to Safely Lower the Number of Women and Gender-Expansive People in New York 
City Jails (June 2022); A Safer, More Effective Option Than Rikers: 1,500 Secure Treatment Beds for People with Serious 
Mental Illness and Addiction Issues (October 2023).
40	 This number is the midpoint of our estimate range, discussed further in Appendix B.
41	
Data provided to the Commission by Correctional Health Services.
42	 Given the different needs and backgrounds of women vs. men, particularly the larger prevalence of mental illness among 
women and the role of abuse in the allegations against incarcerated women, we believe that the various reforms and 
investments outlined here would have a disproportionately decarcerative impact for women, or roughly 1/2 more than men. 
In 2021, when the population of women in jail was 300, we released a report outlining how the women’s population could be 
safely reduced to under 100 people. We stand by our earlier proposals and their effectiveness. However, we add a slightly 
larger range of likely outcomes and of course are starting from a larger initial population of 440. Therefore, we project a 
larger likely population.
43	 It might be possible to find temporary swing space to close Rikers once at least three of the jails and all the secure hospital 
beds are open, but before the fourth jail – likely Manhattan – is finished.
44	 Completing all the designs before any construction begins would permit the City to negotiate all construction pricing for the 
jail at one time, only as design nears completion, rather than in two phases (first for the foundation and exterior, and a second 
for the interior). The Department of Design and Construction has told our Commission it predicts either approach would cost 
roughly the same. However, they note that multiple negotiations increase the likelihood that a deal cannot be reached at 
some point, and that the design-build team could choose to walk away mid-project, even if that would mean leaving hundreds 
of millions, if not billions, of dollars on the table. While that may be true, the Port Authority could guide New York City on how 
to mitigate that risk, especially given the urgency to complete the jails.
45	 We were told it was too late for the other jails. This is despite the fact that our Commission requested the use of value 
engineering several times before the Bronx and Queens jail contracts were approved and signed.
46	 See, e.g., Testimony of Department of Correction Commissioner Lynelle Maginley-Liddie before NYC Council Committee on 
Criminal Justice, Preliminary Budget Hearing (March 7, 2025), video available at https://legistar.council.nyc.gov/Calendar.
aspx#.
47	 Vera Institute of Justice, New York Criminal Legal System Data Hub – Jail, available at https://www.vera.org/ny-data-hub/
Jail. 
48	 Information provided by Correctional Health Services.
49	 Data provided to Commission by Correctional Health Services.
50	 Analysis of NYC Open Data, Daily Inmates in Custody, as of Feb. 20, 2025.
51	 Id.
52	 Correctional Health Services, Local Law 58 Report (Feb. 3, 2025), available at https://hhinternet.blob.core.windows.net/
uploads/2025/02/City-Council-LL58-Report-2024-Q4.pdf.
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
ENDNOTES

103
53	 New York City Independent Budget Office, Does It Take the Court System Longer in New York City to Process Indicted Felony 
Cases Than Elsewhere in the State? (2019), available at https://ibo.nyc.ny.us/iboreports/court-case-length-2019.pdf.
54	 Weill, J., Rempel, M., Rodriguez, K., & Raine, V., Felony Case Delay in New York City: Lessons from a Pilot Project in Brooklyn 
(2021), available at https://www.courtinnovation.org/sites/default/files/media/document/2021/Case_Delay_Policy_
Brief_3.29.2021.pdf.
55	 Office of Court Administration data, as analyzed by the Vera Institute of Justice. Between 2020 and 2023, judges in New York 
City put a total of 110 people on electronic monitoring pretrial.
56	 Some of that additional capacity could also be used as part of an expansion of the 6A work release program, for people 
serving City sentences, as discussed below.
57	 New York City Criminal Justice Agency, NYC Pretrial Data: How many people are arrested and prosecuted in NYC each year? 
(visited March 7, 2025), available at https://www.nycja.org/people-prosecuted. In 2018, this number was 2,618 people. In 
2019, it was 2,343. Id. 
58	 Id. In contrast that year, 94,238 people were arrested and prosecuted once, with the most common charge being 
misdemeanor assault (33%). Id.
59	 Deputy Mayor for Public Safety Philip Banks Holds Briefing on Public Safety in New York City, March 24, 2023, available at 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yOTZICFSAek. 
60	 Id.
61	 Site visit by Commission to pilot in Queens, operated by Criminal Justice Agency (November 2024).  
62	 Swern, Judge A., Lally, K., Yaeger, S., Manhattan Drug Treatment Court 2023 Report to the Stakeholders (2024), on file with 
authors. Rossman, S., Willison, J. B., Mallik-Kane, K., Kim, K., Debus-Sherrill, S., & Downey, P. M. Criminal Justice Interventions for 
Offenders with Mental Illness: Evaluation of Mental Health Courts in Bronx and Brooklyn, (2012) available at: Criminal Justice 
Interventions for Offenders With Mental Illness: Evaluation of Mental Health Courts in Bronx and Brooklyn, New York 
(urban.org). O’Keefe, K. (2006). The Brooklyn Mental Health Court Evaluation: Planning, Implementation, Courtroom Dynamics, 
and Participant Outcomes (2006), available at: The Brooklyn Mental Health Court Evaluation: Planning, Implementation, 
Courtroom Dynamics, and Participant Outcomes | Center for Court Innovation.
63	 41% of people at Rikers with a serious mental illness have a case in Manhattan. Data provided to the Commission by Correctional 
Health Services.
64	 NYC DOC, Annual Report on Mentally Ill Incarcerated Individuals and Recidivism, Calendar Year 2024, available at LL121 
Report CY24.pdf.
65	 Id.
66	 New ACT teams must be approved by the State Office of Mental Health. Each team serves 68 people.
67	 Data provided to Commission by Fountain House.
68	 A sentence of a year or more is served in a New York State prison.
69	 Good time credits generally cut people’s sentence by 1/3; therefore, someone sentenced to serve a year is likely to serve  
8 months.
70	 Department of Correction, Overview of the 6A Initiative Presentation (Apr. 2024), provided to Commission.
71	
Data in this section was provided to the Commission by the Department of Correction.
72	 Id.
73	 Center for Court Innovation, New York City Criminal Justice Agency, CASES, The Early Release 6A Program Documented 
Results: Six Month Update (September 22, 2020), available at https://www.innovatingjustice.org/sites/default/files/media/
documents/2020-11/Early_Release_Outcomes_20201112.pdf.
74	 Id.
75	 Id.
76	 Center for Court Innovation, The Will to Decarcerate: COVID-19 and NYC’s Early Release Program (March 2022), available at 
https://www.innovatingjustice.org/sites/default/files/media/document/2022/COVID_19_Early_Release_Program.pdf.
77	 Id.	
78	 Id.
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
ENDNOTES

104
79	 Id.
80	 Wada, C. & Pooler, T., Community Supervision as a Jail Reduction Strategy: Key Findings from an Impact Evaluation of the 
NYC Early Release Program (forthcoming in 2025; findings provided by authors to Commission). 
81	
Any expansion of 6-A must be done in cooperation with each local district attorney office and OCA. Prosecutors plea bargain 
with the understanding that an individual will serve an agreed-upon period of incarceration (minus good time credits), and 
judges sentence people with the same understanding. That time in custody is justified in part by the fact that a person is 
unable to engage in criminal activity that might harm the community while in custody. That said, most judges and prosecutors 
with whom we’ve spoken have been open to a reasonable expansion of 6-A.
82	 Bernstein, D., & Staley, E. M., Merit Time Program Summary: October 1997 - December 2006 (2007), available at: https://
doccs.ny.gov/system/files/documents/2019/09/ Merit_Time_Through_2006.pdf; Drake, E. K. Barnoski, R., & Aos, S., 
Increased Earned Release from Prison: Impacts of a 2003 Law on Recidivism and Crime Costs, Revised (2009), available 
at: https://www.wsipp.wa.gov/ ReportFile/1039/Wsipp_Increased-Earned-Release-From Prison-Impacts-of-a-2003-Law-
on-Recidivism-and-Crime Costs-Revised_Full-Report.pdf; Guzman, C., Krisberg, B., & Tsukida, C., Accelerated Release: A 
Literature Review. National Council on Crime and Delinquency (2008), available at: https:// www.voiceofsandiego.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/05/ d8a54574-4dad-11df-bd7d-001cc4c03286.pdf.pdf; Hamilton, Z., et al. (2021), Op Cit.; Lawrence, 
A., Cutting Corrections Costs: Earned Time Policies for State Prisoners. National Conference of State Legislatures (2009), 
available at: https://www.ncsl.org/research/civil-and-criminal-justice/earned-time-policies-for state-prisoners.aspx
83	 NY State Senate Bill 2023-S210.
84	 Data provided to Commission by Correctional Health Services.
85	 While “restoring a person to competency” often entails medicating the person (including involuntarily), and perhaps therapy, 
much of the focus is on teaching the person about the courtroom process and personnel. In other words, psychiatric 
treatment is secondary to getting the person to a place where they can understand better who the players are in the case 
against them. Legislation has been introduced to amend this approach.
86	 OMH, September 2024 Monthly Report OMH Facility Performance Metrics and Community Service Investments, available at 
https://omh.ny.gov/omhweb/transformation/docs/omh-monthly-report-sep-2024.pdf.
87	 Id.
88	 Correctional Health Services is proposing State legislation to permit CHS to perform restoration in the jails, in jail wards in 
City hospitals, or in outposted units. While that process could in some instances speed up this process significantly, and take 
advantage of continuity of care that is paying dividends, permitting treatment over objection in the jails is fraught and would 
have to be navigated very carefully.
89	 The judiciary should also explore whether orders mandating treatment might be better set for six months rather than the 
current default of one year.
90	 https://bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/pmcjs.pdf.
91	 NYC Health + Hospital, Correctional Health Services (CHS), CHS Patient Profile for Individuals in the New York City Jail 
System (January 2025), available at https://hhinternet.blob.core.windows.net/uploads/2025/03/correctional-health-
services-patient-profile-metrics-january-2025.pdf.
92	 CHS, Local Law 58 Report (Feb. 3, 2025), available at https://hhinternet.blob.core.windows.net/uploads/2025/02/City-
Council-LL58-Report-2024-Q4.pdf.
93	 Id. https://hhinternet.blob.core.windows.net/uploads/2024/07/chs-access-report-quarter-2-2024.pdf. While there is no 
dispute that people at Rikers miss thousands of mental health and other appointments each month, the reasons for doing 
so are subject to dispute. Correctional Health Services reports that 29% of appointments are missed because they are not 
produced by correctional staff (which could be because no officer is available to escort the person or because of a security 
incident; incarcerated people cannot go to an appointment without an officer to escort them), and 6% of the time people refuse 
to attend their appointments. Id. In contrast, DOC reports that 55% of appointments are missed because people refuse to 
attend. https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doc/downloads/sharepoint/Medical_Non-Production_June_2024.pdf DOC does not 
report the number of appointments missed because of a failure to produce the person, instead lumping those incidents with 
times when people “choose[] to instead attend a work assignment, law library, school or religious services or when maximum 
clinic capacity has been reached”). Id. Failure to produce incarcerated people for medical appointments is the subject of active 
litigation. https://legalaidnyc.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/08/323_Ps_MOL_in_support_of_contempt_motion.pdf.	
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
ENDNOTES

105
94	 NYC Health + Hospital, Correctional Health Services (CHS), CHS Patient Profile for Individuals in the New York City Jail 
System (January 2025), available at https://hhinternet.blob.core.windows.net/uploads/2025/03/correctional-health-
services-patient-profile-metrics-january-2025.pdf.
95	 Treatment statistics provided by CHS to Commission.	
96	 NYC Health + Hospital, Correctional Health Services (CHS), CHS Patient Profile for Individuals in the New York City Jail 
System (January 2025), available at https://hhinternet.blob.core.windows.net/uploads/2025/03/correctional-health-
services-patient-profile-metrics-january-2025.pdf.
97	 For instance, deinstitutionalization in the 1960s ended the warehousing and mistreatment of people with serious mental 
illness, but failed to deliver the community-based care that was meant to replace it. In 1955, there were 93,314 residents 
in NYS-run psychiatric centers. In February 2024, there were 3,541. New York State Comptroller, Mental Health: Inpatient 
Service Capacity (March 2024), available at https://www.osc.ny.gov/files/reports/pdf/mental-health-inpatient-service-
capacity.pdf. It cannot be the case that only 4% of those people, or their equivalents today, needed institutional care – the 
need did not evaporate. Governor Hochul, State and City leaders have laudably made increased investment in mental health 
care a top priority. Much more remains to be done.
98	 Equally, it is beyond our remit to address crime-fighting generally. We do think it important to highlight that most violent crime 
remains centered in a few blocks of a few neighborhoods. Gang violence characterized by a tit-for-tat, seemingly endless 
cycle of retaliation, stubbornly persists. This was truly 35 years ago when the Seven Neighborhood Study was published, 
and 18 years ago when the Million Dollar Block Study was released. All too little has changed. As Mayor Adams’ Gun 
Violence Prevention Task Force and Every Block Counts initiative have recognized, there is a tremendous need to focus 
resources, investments, and opportunity in the areas hit hardest by crime and incarceration. Just as we must be a city of 
second chances, we must do all we can to provide everyone with a first chance – something absent for too many today.
99	 There is much debate among City and State leaders regarding legislation broadening the power to involuntarily hospitalize 
people with severe mental illness, to treat people who are otherwise resistant to care. While we do not take a position on 
such legislation, there has to be a pragmatic way to get these people into the care they need while preserving due process 
rights.
100	Eric Elbogen and Sally Johnson, The intricate link between violence and mental disorder: results from the National 
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions, Arch Gen Psychiatry (2009 Feb); 66(2):152-61, available at https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19188537/; The Link Between Mental Illness and Being Subjected to Crime in Denmark vs the 
United States, available at https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapsychiatry/article-abstract/2680801. It is also reality that 
people with serious mental illness are far more likely to be the victims of violence than to perpetrate it.
101	 The bed count of Hope House is a direct result of federal law that bars Medicaid from paying for care in a residential 
psychiatric facility with more than 16 beds. That restriction was created in 1965 to bolster deinstitutionalization from inhumane 
psychiatric facilities, but today unduly limits access to care. Proposed bi-partisan legislation, the Michelle Go Act, would lift 
the Medicaid psychiatric in-patient payment restriction to 36 beds.
102	 Colton, Jana, et al., Reaching the Unreachable: Intensive Mobile Treatment, an Innovative Model of Community Mental 
Health Engagement and Treatment, Community Mental Health Journal (March 2024), available at https://www.cucs.org/wp-
content/uploads/2024/03/Reaching-the-Unreachable-IMT-Whitepaper.pdf.pdf
103	 Id.
104	 Data provided to Commission by NYC Council.
105	 Corporation for Supportive Housing, FUSE 10-Year Follow-Up Report (April 2023), available at FUSE-10-Year-Report-Initial-
Findings.pdf (csh.org).
106	 Id. A study of supportive housing in Denver found that after three years, participants on average had 8 fewer police contacts 
(34% decline), 4 fewer arrests (40% decline), and spent 38 fewer days in jail (27% decline) than a control group. Participants’ 
emergency room visits declined 40% and their use of detox services declined 65%. 77% remained in stable housing. Urban 
Institute, Denver Supportive Housing Social Impact Bond Initiative (July 2021), available at https://www.urban.org/policy-
centers/metropolitan-housing-and-communities-policy-center/projects/denver-supportive-housing-social-impact-bond-
initiative/publications.
107	 New York City Comptroller, Housing First: A Proven Approach to Dramatically Reduce Street Homelessness (June 2023), 
available at https://comptroller.nyc.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/Brief-Report_Housing-First.pdf
108	 Estimate as of October 2024, as provided to the Commission by the Corporation for Supportive Housing. This includes $ 
25,600 for services and $28,000 for rent for a 1-bedroom apartment.
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
ENDNOTES

106
109	 Data provided by Correctional Health Services.
110	 A federal monitor overseeing discharge planning for people receiving mental health treatment at Rikers found that Rikers 
staff were processing only 80% of applications of people social workers believed to be eligible. Fifty-Third Regular Report 
of the Compliance Monitors, Brad H. v. City of New York, Index No. 117882/99 at 34 (June 28, 2024), available at https://
mhp.urbanjustice.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/10/2024/07/Brad-H-53rd-report-final-2024_06_28-email.pdf. By another 
measure, the Monitor found that only 44% of people who were eligible for supportive housing had their applications handled 
appropriately at Rikers. Id. at 37.
111	 Corporation for Supportive Housing, Advancing Supportive Housing Solutions to Reduce Homelessness for People 
Impacted by the Criminal Legal System (2022), available at: https://www.csh.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/ Reduce-
Homelessness-for-People-Impacted-by-the-Criminal-Legal-System.pdf.  The Corporation for Supportive Housing estimated 
that of the 2,589 people who needed supportive housing, 777 people met the eligibility criteria for supportive housing, but 
1,812 people did not because City regulations no longer considered them “chronically homeless,” a key eligibility criteria, 
once they were in Rikers for more than 90 days. Id. at 6.
112	 CHS, Local Law 58 Report (Feb. 3, 2025), available at https://hhinternet.blob.core.windows.net/uploads/2025/02/City-
Council-LL58-Report-2024-Q4.pdf.
113	 Fountain House exemplifies the impact of clubhouses. Per the organization, 25% of Fountain House members are currently 
or were recently involved in the criminal legal system. Only 5% recidivate. Health care costs and hospitalizations for Fountain 
House members are down by more than 20% compared to non-members with similar conditions.
114	 See, e.g., Linning, S., et al., Exploring the Correspondence Between General Correctional Programming and Inmate 
Misconduct Using a Time-Course Framework, Int J Offender Ther Comp Criminol. 2022 Feb; 66(2-3): 209–226, available at 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8721553/.
115	 NYC Administrative Code § 9-110 (“The commissioner of correction … shall offer to all incarcerated individuals incarcerated 
for more than 10 days a minimum of five hours per day of incarcerated individual programming or education, excluding 
weekends and holidays.”).
116	 Quote taken from focus group held by Commission in September 2024.
117	 This includes data from five of the six non-profits whose contracts were cut.
118	 Per data provided by DOC to the Commission, in 2024, 19,209 people were discharged from Rikers 23,429 times. Discharge 
data from the Mayor’s Office of Criminal Justice shows that in 2024, 74% discharges from Rikers are straight to the 
community. 14.5% of people at Rikers go to state prisons, while 11.2% go to federal or other institutions, including those 
outside New York State. The other 74% return straight from Rikers to NYC communities, including people who are able to 
pay bail after some period of incarceration (20%), are released by judges (27%), have a warrant lifted (7%), are diverted to a 
program (4%), or serve a City sentence and are then released (16%).      
119	 For instance, DOC fails to produce people with mental illness to re-entry planning appointments 30% of the time. Fifty-Third 
Regular Report of the Compliance Monitors, Brad H. v. City of New York at 26.
120	 New York City Department of Correction, Local Law 121 of 2016 Annual Report on Mentally Ill Incarcerated Individuals and 
Recidivism CY 2024, available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doc/downloads/pdf/LL121%20Report%20CY24.pdf. 
121	 Fifty-Third Regular Report of the Compliance Monitors, Brad H. v. City of New York at 46.
122	 Id.
123	 Efforts should be made to ensure releases take place during business hours, whenever possible. That will maximize the 
chance a person being released connects with a service provider. Moving writ court to an early day in the week is one way 
that was suggested to us to ensure people are not released over the weekend, when many community-based providers are 
closed. 
124	 Opinion and Order on Motion for Contempt, Nunez v. New York City Department of Correction et al., No. 11-CV-5845-LTS 
(Nov. 27, 2024), available at https://www.nysd.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/2024-11/Nunez%20-%20Contempt%20
OpOrd.pdf (internal citations to case record omitted). 
125	 For instance, Correctional Health Services reported that in the Fourth Quarter of 2024, incarcerated people were seen for 
scheduled appointments 58% of the time. 29% of the time, or 56,165 times, CHS reports DOC did not produce the person. 6% 
of the time, or 10,692 times, CHS was told the person refused and was able to verify that. Correctional Health Services, Local 
Law 58: CY 2024 Quarter 4 (October – December), available at https://hhinternet.blob.core.windows.net/uploads/2025/02/
City-Council-LL58-Report-2024-Q4.pdf. Meanwhile, DOC reports that for December 2024 alone, the person refused 7,843 
times, and only at most 3,984 times did DOC fail to produce the person (DOC lumps failures to produce with lockdowns, 
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
ENDNOTES

107
people choosing to attend work or religious services, and other reasons someone may not attend an appointment). 
Department of Correction, Monthly Report on Medical Appointment Non-Production December 2024, available at https://
www.nyc.gov/assets/doc/downloads/pdf/Medical_Non-Production_December_2024.pdf.   
126	 Testimony of then-DOC Commissioner Louis Molina before the New York City Council in March 2023 and before the New 
York City Board of Correction in July 2023.  
127	 Nneka Jones Tapia, Vital City Panel, How New York City Can Transform Jail Conditions (September 24, 2024), available at 
https://www.vitalcitynyc.org/articles/its-not-impossible-how-nyc-can-transform-jail-conditions-transcript. 
128	 The most recent report from the Federal Monitor in the Nunez case highlights a promising example of how much strong 
management matters. The warden in the Enhanced Supervision Housing at the Rose M. Singer Center (RESH), Rikers’ main 
restrictive housing program for people who have committed acts of serious violence in Rikers, has been making a difference 
with strong mentoring and training. The warden has reportedly worked intensively 1-on-1 with staff after incidents, reviewing 
video to walk through the entire scenario and determine how staff could have acted differently. The warden has also given 
hands-on training for staff in various security procedures. The Monitor reports that this mentoring and training is helping 
improve staff procedures and reduce violence in the unit. https://tillidgroup.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/11/2024-11-22-
18th-Monitors-Report-11-22-2024.pdf at 32.
129	 See, e.g., National Institute of Justice, The Impact of Shift Length in Policing on Performance, Health, Quality of Life, Sleep, 
Fatigue, and Extra-Duty Employment (2011), available at https://www.policinginstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/
Amendola-et-al.-2011-The-Impact-of-Shift-Length-Full-Report-.pdf. City law, such as Administrative Code Section 9-116, 
may have to be amended to permit this experimentation, as might union contracts. Notably, 10-hour shifts have proven more 
beneficial in terms of officers’ quality of life and reduced overtime than 12-hour shifts. 
130	 See, e.g., Ben Seal, How One Philadelphia Prison Could Change Incarceration in America, City Life (Nov. 2, 2024), available 
at https://www.phillymag.com/news/2024/11/02/chester-prison-little-scandinavia/. 
131	 Marcella Alsan & Crystal Yang, The Hidden Health Care Crisis Behind Bars: A Randomized Trial to Accredit U.S. Jails (January 
2025), available at https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w33357/w33357.pdf. 
132	 Id. 
133	 NYS Office of Mental Health, Corrections Officers – CARES UP, available at https://nycaresup.com/resources/corrections/. 
134	 Id.
135	 DOC Press Release, NYC Department of Correction Opens a New Staff Wellness Center on Rikers Island (Jan. 10, 2025), 
available at https://www.nyc.gov/site/doc/media/wellness-center_n.page.
136	 See, e.g., National Institute of Justice, “Swift and Certain” Sanctions in Probation Are Highly Effective: Evaluation of the HOPE 
Program (2012), available at https://nij.ojp.gov/topics/articles/swift-and-certain-sanctions-probation-are-highly-effective-
evaluation-hope-program#noteReferrer3.
137	 Status Report by the Nunez Independent Monitor (Nov. 2024), available at https://tillidgroup.com/wp-content/
uploads/2024/11/2024-11-22-18th-Monitors-Report-11-22-2024.pdf at 133.
138	 Id. at 125. 
139	 Id. at 101-102. 
140	 The federal court in Nunez recently found that: 
	
While DOC opened RESH in June 2023 with extensive security protocols and programming engagement, an allocation 
of leadership positions precisely for the unit, specifically selected uniform and programming staff, a specialized training 
curriculum, and low staffing ratios, RESH still exhibits poor sanitation, inadequate staffing, pervasive contraband and 
weapons, and high levels of violence and fear. In 2023, RESH had the highest use of force rate of any facility, as well 
as high rates of stabbings, slashings, and fire-setting, due to poor plan implementation and problems with staffing and 
supervision. 
	
Opinion and Order on Motion for Contempt, Nunez, at 13-14 (noting that in November 2024, “the Monitoring Team reported 
some improvements in the management and performance of RESH”). 
141	 See Testimony of Justyna Rzewinski before the New York City Board of Correction (Oct. 8, 2024), available at https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=mT9njFKspXI (starting at 22:16). 
142	 Jacob Kaye, DOC boss denies knowing about Rikers’ ‘worst-kept secret’, Queens Daily Eagle (Nov. 13, 2024), available at 
https://queenseagle.com/all/2024/11/13/doc-boss-denies-knowing-about-rikers-worst-kept-secret.
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
ENDNOTES

108
143	 See Graham Rayman, Mentally ill at Rikers often locked in cells for weeks, denied treatment, NY Daily News (Oct. 8, 2024), 
available at https://www.nydailynews.com/2024/10/08/mentally-ill-at-rikers-often-locked-in-cells-for-weeks-denied-
treatment-exclusive/; Graham Rayman, Longer Wait for Help, NY Daily News (Oct. 23, 2024), available at https://www.
yu.edu/sites/default/files/inline-files/article-OMH.pdf.
144	 Jacob Kaye, DOC boss denies knowing about Rikers’ ‘worst-kept secret’, Queens Daily Eagle (Nov. 13, 2024), available at 
https://queenseagle.com/all/2024/11/13/doc-boss-denies-knowing-about-rikers-worst-kept-secret.
145	 This should include mandatory reporting up the respective chains of command, and a requirement that whenever necessary 
immediate action be taken by senior leadership to ensure people receive care swiftly and safely. Any necessary disciplinary 
action should also be taken to end the practice.
146	 Data provided to the Commission by the Department of Correction.
147	 Id.
148	 Deloitte, 2024 Gen Z and Millennial Survey, available at https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/ec/Documents/
about-deloitte/deloitte-2024-genz-millennial-survey.pdf.
149	 Graham Rayman, NYC no longer requires college credit for new officers at Rikers Island and other jails, Correction 
commissioner decides, NY Daily News (Apr. 21, 2023), available at https://www.nydailynews.com/2023/04/21/nyc-no-
longer-requires-college-credit-for-new-officers-at-rikers-island-and-other-jails-correction-commissioner-decides/.
150	 Graham Rayman, NYC Correction Dept. slashes academy training time for officers in half, NY Daily News (Apr. 17, 2023), 
available at https://www.nydailynews.com/2023/04/17/nyc-correction-dept-slashes-academy-training-time-for-officers-in-
half/.
151	 NYC Office of Management and Budget, January 2025 Financial Plan Detail Fiscal Years 2025 – 2029, available at January 
2025 Financial Plan Detail Fiscal Years 2025 - 2029 at 69.
152	 Special Report of the Nunez Independent Monitor, March 16, 2022 (“The level of dysfunction within the Department’s 
staffing framework is unmatched by any jurisdiction with which the Monitoring Team has had experience. The dysfunction 
is so profound and pervasive that even a basic post analysis identifying where staff should be and when is impossible to 
conduct at this time for the reasons outlined below.”). 
153	 In June 2024, the Nunez Monitor reported: “The Department, after a two-year delay, has finally begun planning for a post 
analysis as required by Action Plan § C ¶ 3 (viii), ordered in June of 2022. The purpose of the post analysis is to identify 
the specific posts that require a uniform staff member in order to operate the jails safely and efficiently.” (italics in original) 
In November 2024, the Nunez Monitor reported: “The Department requested that the State Commission on Correction 
(“SCOC”) conduct the post analysis required by Action Plan § C ¶ 3 (viii). The SCOC’s work on the post analysis began 
in October 2024 with a focus on one facility so that the Department and the SCOC could work together on this initial 
assessment before expanding it.”
154	 NYC Office of Management and Budget, Department of Correction Agency Expense Preliminary Budget Summary for Fiscal 
Year 2026 (Jan. 2025), available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/omb/downloads/pdf/jan25/perc1-25.pdf at 40E.
155	 DOC Data Dashboard, available at https://www.nyc.gov/site/doc/about/doc-data-dashboard.page. The latest staff 
headcount available is for January 2025 (6,021). For jail population, the latest available is for February 2025 (6,760). Given 
the jail population is shifting lately more than the staff headcount, which has stayed roughly the same since June 2024, we 
use the January staff and February population numbers. 
156	 Federal Bureau of Justice Statistics, Jail Inmates 2023 – Statistical Tables (Jan. 2025), available at https://bjs.ojp.gov/media/
document/ji23.pdf at 32. 
157	 U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Prison System Salaries and Expenses FY 2025 Performance Budget Congressional 
Submission, available at https://web.archive.org/web/20250203010921/https://www.justice.gov/jmd/media/1342136/
dl?inline.
158	 DOC Data Dashboard, available at https://www.nyc.gov/site/doc/about/doc-data-dashboard.page. Generalized leave 
numbers provided by DOC to the Commission.
159	 NYC Office of Management and Budget, Budget Function Analysis for FY26 (Jan. 2025) at 163.
160	 These estimates annualize cost/savings of the new correctional system over a thirty-year term. Actual benefits and costs will 
not run concurrently every year due to the delayed implementation of cost savings and upfront costs.
161	 NYC Office of Management and Budget, Department of Correction Agency Expense Preliminary Budget Summary for Fiscal 
Year 2026 (Jan. 2025), available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/omb/downloads/pdf/jan25/perc1-25.pdf at 40E.
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
ENDNOTES

109
162	 This presumes a ratio of .72 correction officers for every 100 incarcerated people. This is based on National Institute of 
Corrections guidance which has found that direct supervision jails like the ones being built have lower staffing costs than 
traditional facilities: “Operational costs were lower for the direct supervision cases. Staffing costs were . . . 33 percent lower 
for the direct supervision jail.” National Institute of Corrections, Comparison of “Direct” and “Indirect” Supervision Correctional 
Facilities, available at http://static.nicic.gov/Library/007807.pdf. Accordingly, we have estimated that the necessary uniformed 
officer to detainee staffing ratio in the new facilities could be decreased by at least 33 percent to a ratio of 0.72 uniformed 
officer for every 1 person in custody (0.72:1.). We expect there will be approximately 4,250 people under DOC custody, out of 
a total systemwide population of 4,500 people. This is because we expect approximately 250 people will be housed in new 
psychiatric treatment beds for competency-related assessments and treatment. If the total population under DOC control were 
4,500, the operating savings would be $1.99 billion and the overtime savings would be $350 million. If the total population 
under DOC control were 4,000, the operating savings would be $2.18 billion and the overtime savings would be $364 million. 
Inflation for operational savings is conservatively inflated using the five-year average CPI of 3.7% from 2020-2024 for the New 
York-Newark-Jersey City metropolitan area. This estimate annualizes the savings of the new borough-based system over a 
thirty-year term, to be consistent with debt service costs.
	
We note that true staffing estimates must be based on floorplans and operations matters, which are not yet available to us. We 
estimate there will continue to be roughly 1,700 civilian staff budgeted for the agency.
163	 Here too, we conservatively calculate inflation using the five-year average CPI of 3.7% from 2020-2024 for the New York-
Newark-Jersey City metropolitan area.
164	 Average length of stay data is from New York City Comptroller’s Department of Correction Dashboard, available at https://
comptroller.nyc.gov/services/for-the-public/department-of-correction-doc/dashboard/ (visited Feb. 21, 2025). Under a 
Medicaid 1115 Waiver, the federal government would cover roughly 90% of the cost of most medical care in the last 90 days 
of a person’s incarceration. At least 11 other states have secured this funding to ensure people have sound re-entry plans and 
a warm handoff to community-based providers when people leave jail. New York State declined to submit such a Medicaid 
waiver application during the Biden Administration, leaving tens of millions of federal dollars on the table. That has forced 
New York City to fill the gap, but City spending is not enough to get the job done consistently. An infusion of Medicaid funds 
would help ensure continuity of psychiatric, medical, and addiction-related treatment for people being released from jail, 
and help head off reoffending. We urge New York State to act swiftly. We hope the traditional bi-partisan support for re-entry 
related programs, as exemplified by the First Step Act, will continue in the current federal administration. 
165	 NYC Open Data, Daily Inmates in Custody, available at https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Public-Safety/Daily-Inmates-In-
Custody/7479-ugqb/data (as of March 8, 2025).
166	 Post-COVID, the City has had to add billions of dollars in capital funds to the budget for the borough-based jails and the 
secure hospital beds. Construction has gotten significantly more expensive across the city, and these projects are no 
exception
	
As mentioned above, it is likely possible for the City to lower construction costs by using value engineering. This process 
has reduced construction costs by up to 15% and also resulted in faster construction. The City has agreed to this process in 
Manhattan, but declined to undertake it for the other facilities. 
167	 Approximate cost of debt service over a thirty-year time period is calculated as 6% of debt outstanding. 
168	 Cost projection is based on the per-bed cost for the 100 forsenic psychiatric beds on Wards Island included in the FY 2026 
New York State Executive Budget, available at https://www.budget.ny.gov/pubs/archive/fy26/ex/book/briefingbook.pdf.
169	 Approximate cost of debt service over a thirty-year time period is calculated as 6% of debt outstanding. 
170	 As part of our work this past year, we met a number of times with representatives of the Brooklyn and Chinatown 
communities surrounding the local jails. The representatives raised numerous valid concerns about the jail demolition and 
construction. We reached out to the relevant community boards in the Bronx and Queens, both to the board chairs and the 
district managers seeking meetings, but never received replies. 
	
In our discussions, among other topics, representatives from the Chinatown community raised concerns regarding the potential 
destabilization of surrounding tenements during the construction process. We urge the Administration to work with local 
property owners to thoroughly assess any potential danger to their buildings, to shore them up if necessary, and to develop a 
contingency plan should any neighboring buildings’ foundations become unstable. Generally, the Administration has attempted 
to be responsive to the community’s concerns. For instance, we appreciate that the Administration answered the community’s 
concerns and appointed an independent environmental monitor over the site, and has worked with the Charles B. Wang 
Community Health Center to find replacement clinical space after jail demolition made its old space untenable. 
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
ENDNOTES

110
	
Brooklyn neighborhood representatives raised concerns about existing operational difficulties surrounding the NYPD’s 
practices transporting people to the local courthouse, and the lack of a location for ambulances called to aid people in the 
local courthouse. Those challenges should be dealt with now, and a plan established for how to handle them when the 
borough jail opens. 
	
Both communities also called for reform of the Department of Correction and intensive efforts to improve operations and 
reduce the levels of violence in the jails. We share their concerns and the urgency of the need to address them. 
171	 Our Commission also initially recommended exploring extending LaGuardia Airport onto Rikers. However, our internal 
analysis since then, combined with changed realities on the ground and the deepening climate crisis, have convinced us that 
Renewable Rikers is the much better option. We have also been swayed by the fact that the communities most impacted by 
Rikers strongly prefer Renewable Rikers. 
172	 Renewable Rikers would help NYC comply with New York State’s landmark Climate Leadership and Community Protection 
Act. The Act mandates that 35-40% of public investment in climate infrastructure be directed toward disadvantaged 
communities. 
173	 Local Law 16 of 2021.
174	 Id.
175	 Local Law 31 of 2021. 
176	 Local Law 17 of 2021.
177	 Local Law 16 of 2021.
178	 City of New York, PlaNYC: Getting Sustainability Done (April 2023), available at https://climate.cityofnewyork.us/wp-
content/uploads/2023/06/PlaNYC-2023-Full-Report.pdf.   
179	 The volume in millions of gallons of CSO discharged out of outfalls in 2018, as modeled by the Department of Environmental 
Protection, data compiled by Open Sewer Atlas.
180	 PlaNYC: Getting Sustainability Done 
181	 In 2012, New York City entered into ten water body specific Long Term Control Plans (LTCP) with the New York State 
Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC), requiring infrastructural investments to meet water quality standards. Of 
these ten LTCPs, six fall within the drainage areas served by the existing sewage treatment plants surrounding Rikers Island. 
As water quality standards become increasingly stringent—including the goal of eliminating combined sewer overflows by 
2060—future LTCP investments could be streamlined and consolidated through planning for Renewable Rikers. See https://
www.nyc.gov/site/dep/water/citywide-long-term-control-plan.page. 
182	 See NY State CSO Consent Order for Flushing Bay, available at https://dec.ny.gov/environmental-protection/water/cso/nyc-
cso. 
183	 New York City Comprehensive Waterfront Plan. 
184	 See, e.g., Assessing New Yorkers’ Access to NYC’s Waterfront: New York City Waterfront Public Access Study and the 
New York City Comprehensive Water Plan for case studies demonstrating economic development on city-owned sites.  
185	 London’s public engagement strategies, including public art installations, incite curiosity and engagement—an approach that 
could inform Rikers planning and keep communities engaged during a lengthy, multi-phased process. 
186	 A subsequent purpose must be established before the City can use capital funds for demolition on Rikers. 
187	 This is likely to be the case even with the current uncertainty about federal spending under the Trump Administration, 
especially as funding for Renewable Rikers would not need to be secured until several years from now. 
188	 Historically, infrastructure planning treated waste, water, and energy as separate domains, leading to mono-functional 
infrastructure, often concentrating multiple noxious facilities in disadvantaged communities. Climate change has underscored 
the interconnectedness of these systems, highlighting the need for coordinated, centralized planning that can yield 
multifunctional benefits while minimizing the spatial and environmental footprint of such facilities. For instance, sewage 
treatment plants, among the highest energy consumers in the city, can be integrated with renewable energy and storage 
solutions. Biosolids generated by sewage treatment plants can be integrated into composting systems and provide energy, 
creating closed-loop designs. Facilities can be designed to incorporate public access, enhancing their value as community 
assets. Rikers provides a remarkable opportunity to enhance this symbiosis. 
189	 See Local Law 16 of 2021.
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
ENDNOTES

111
190	 These include: Closing Rikers Island A Roadmap for Reducing Jail in New York City (July 2021); Path to Under 100: 
Strategies to Safely Lower the Number of Women and Gender-Expansive People in New York City Jails (June 2022); 
A Safer, More Effective Option Than Rikers: 1,500 Secure Treatment Beds for People with Serious Mental Illness and 
Addiction Issues (October 2023).
191	 Presentation by Exodus Transitional Community, available at Bridging_The_Gap_Presentation.pdf
192	 The State Office of Mental Health also funds a few dozen transitional beds in New York City for people returning home from 
prison. See NYS Office of Mental Health, Short-term Transitional Residence for Individuals Reentering the Community from 
Prison (Dec. 2023), available at https://omh.ny.gov/omhweb/rfp/2023/strircp/sttr_reentry_final.pdf.
193	 Approximately 300 existing transitional beds have a specialized focus on people with serious mental illness. The non-profit 
that runs those beds, Housing Works, estimates at least 250 more are needed.
194	 Charles P, Muentner L, & Kjellstrand J, Parenting and incarceration: Perspectives on father–child involvement during reentry 
from prison, Social Service Review, 93(2), 218–261 (2019), available at https://doi.org/10.1111/cfs.12714; Dill LJ, Mahaffey 
C, Mosley T, Treadwell H, Barkwell F, & Barnhill S, “I want a second chance”: Experiences of African American fathers in 
reentry. American Journal of Men’s Health, 10(6), 459–465 (2016), available at https://doi.org/10.1177/1557988315569593; 
Bahr Stephen J., Armstrong Anita Harker, Gibbs Benjamin G., Harris Paul E., and Fisher James K., The Reentry Process: How 
Parolees Adjust to Release from Prison (2005), available at Fathering 3 (3): 243–65; Visher, C. A., Bakken, N. W., & Gunter, 
W. D., Fatherhood, Community Reintegration, and Successful Outcomes. Journal of Offender Rehabilitation, 52(7), 451–469 
(2013), available at https://doi.org/10.1080/10509674.2013.829899.  
195	 Data provided to the Commission by United Way.  
196	 Data provided to the Commission by the Osborne Association. 
197	 See note 81.
198	 Bureau of Justice Statistics. (Percent of violent victimizations by reporting to the police, 1993 to 2023). Generated using the 
NCVS Dashboard (N-DASH) at www.bjs.ojp.gov. (Sept 20, 2024).
INDEPENDENT RIKERS COMMISSION | THE BLUEPRINT TO CLOSE RIKERS
ENDNOTES

112
