more 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
JOCELYN E. STRAUBER 
COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE Release #04-2025 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
TUESDAY, JANUARY 28, 2025 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
  
DOI’S OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR THE NYPD CONCLUDES THAT CERTAIN SOCIAL MEDIA POSTS 
BY SEVERAL NYPD EXECUTIVES WERE IRRESPONSIBLE AND UNPROFESSIONAL AND 
RECOMMENDS IMPROVEMENTS TO NYPD’S SOCIAL MEDIA USE POLICY 
 
The Department of Investigation’s (“DOI”) Office of the Inspector General for the New York City 
Police Department (“OIG-NYPD”) released a Report today concerning the policies related to the New York 
City Police Department’s (“NYPD”) social media use and several troubling social media posts that were 
made by NYPD executives in the first half of calendar year 2024. On May 3, 2024, DOI received a request 
from New York City Council  Speaker Adrienne E. Adams that OIG-NYPD investigate NYPD’s “policies, 
practices, and operations related to its use of social media.” The Speaker alleged that the Department’s 
use of its official social media accounts demonstrated “a deeply troubling pattern and practice” of “target[ing] 
public officials and members of the public with invective that can plainly be construed as intimidating and 
dangerous.” Speaker Adams included several examples of posts by NYPD leadership that in her view were 
part of that pattern. 
 
DOI’s investigation primarily focused on the policies, procedures, practices of NYPD, as well as 
certain NYPD social media posts and the broader social media conversations  — with a City Council 
Member, journalists and other members of the public — in which those posts occurred. 
 
DOI Commissioner Jocelyn E. Strauber said, “New York City deserves public officials who use 
social media responsibly, to communicate accurate information and to prompt respectful dialogue on issues 
of importance to the community, and not as a means to ridicule those with whom they disagree. No aspect 
of the social media exchanges that DOI reviewed in this investigation served the public. While NYPD rightly 
has refrained from such exchanges since early May 2024, the Department should strengthen its  social 
media policies, particularly with respect to oversight of executive posts , to ensure that all posts on the 
Department’s social media accounts meet the NYPD’s standards of courtesy and professionalism.” 
 
OIG-NYPD Inspector General Jeanene L. Barrett said, “In light of NYPD’s significance, power, and 
authority within the City, the Department must maintain a consistently respectful and courteous level of 
discourse in its official communications. It is inappropriate for NYPD to use its platform to target and demean 
journalists, elected officials, and other members of the public. The measures NYPD has taken to improve 
oversight and depersonalize interactions reflect steps in the right dir ection; however, consistent oversight 
is key. The advancement of NYPD’s policy positions and missions in public statements should always be 
informative, accurate, and professional.” 
 
OIG-NYPD reviewed all of the X posts made between January 2022 through August  2024 for 
@NYPDChiefofPatrol, @NYPDDaughtry, and @NYPD news, accounts speci fically identified in Speaker 
Adams’ request, as well as the posts of other individuals including journalists and Councilmembers to which 
these NYPD posts at times were responding. OIG-NYPD also reviewed the NYPD’s social media policies, 
as well as Citywide media policies, among others. OIG-NYPD determined that NYPD’s social media policies 
and practices do not fully comply with the Citywide Policy and that NYPD did not provide sufficient oversight 
of posts made on executive accounts. This lack of compliance and, in particular, the absence of an internal 
approval process for executive account posts , contributed, in part, to NYPD’s failure to ensure that the 

2 
 
posts on its official executive accounts were courteous, accurate, and fully in compliance with relevant laws 
and regulations.  
 
The investigation found: 
 
• Certain X posts made by members of NYPD’s executive staff on official City accounts were 
unprofessional and encouraged an unproductive public discourse. They violated Department 
policies related to being courteous and civil , and raise questions with respect to whether they 
may be deemed prohibited engagement in political activity by City employees, but DOI reaches 
no conclusion on this issue. 
 
• Several of NYPD’s practices regarding social media are not in compliance with the Citywide 
Social Media Policy, applicable to all City agencies.  
 
• NYPD’s official use of social media policy (dated December 2, 2022) has not been updated to 
include all of the requirements of the most recent Citywide Social Media Policy that was issued 
on June 2023. Also, NYPD’s use of social media policy does not provi de rules or guidance 
about what content and language is appropriate to be posted from an official Department 
account.  
 
• NYPD executives with individual social media accounts operate their accounts without 
sufficient oversight and outside the supervision of  the office of NYPD’s Deputy Commissioner 
of Public Information.  
 
• NYPD does not provide formal training to NYPD executives with individual social media 
accounts regarding appropriate content for posting and the public impact of social media 
communications. 
 
DOI issued six policy and procedure recommendations, specifically that NYPD should:  
 
• Memorialize in writing an internal review and approval process for posts on executive accounts. 
 
• Update all relevant Patrol Guide Procedure and Administrative Guide Procedure sections to 
align with the requirements of the Citywide Social Media Policy. 
 
• Review the Citywide Social Media Policy and ensure NYPD is in compliance with all of its 
requirements. 
 
• Update the Department’s social media use policy to include rules and guidance about 
appropriate content and language for posting on official Department social media accounts.  
 
• Assign Digital Communications Officers to all social media accounts, including at the executive 
level, to ensure that social media posts are cons istent with Citywide and Department policy. 
This requirement should be memorialized in writing.  
 
• Train all staff that use official agency social media as to the requirements of the Citywide Social 
Media Policy, the Department’s social media policy, and best practices. 
 
This Report was prepared by Deputy Inspector General Percival Rennie of DOI’s Office of the 
Inspector General for the NYPD,  with the assistance of Investigative Project Analyst Crystal Ynoa,  Data 
Analyst Stephen Elin, and guidance provided by Special Counsel to the Inspectors General Maria Paolillo, 
and Director of Intergovernmental Affairs and Special Counsel Rebecca Chasan. The Report was 
supervised by Inspector General Jeanene L. Barrett , First Deputy Inspector General Annette B.  Almazan, 
Deputy Commissioner of Strategic Initiatives Christopher Ryan, and Deputy Commissioner/Chief of 
Investigations Dominick Zarrella.  
 
DOI is one of the oldest law-enforcement agencies in the country and New York City’s corruption watchdog. Investigations 
may involve any agency, officer, elected official or employee of the City, as well as those who do business with or receive benefits 
from the City. DOI’s strategy attacks corruption comprehensively through systemic investigations that lead to high-impact arrests, 
preventive internal controls and operational reforms that improve the way the City runs. 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
 
 
  
 
January 2025                    
Jocelyn E. Strauber  
Commissioner                                                                                      
Jeanene L. Barrett 
Inspector General  
 
An Assessment of         
NYPD’s Use of  
Social Media  
 
New York City Department of Investigation 
Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD  
 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 1  
 
I. Executive Summary ......................................................................................... 2 
II. Introduction and Background....................................................................... 6 
A. Investigation Initiation ................................................................................. 6 
B. Scope and Methodology ................................................................................. 7 
III. An Analysis Part I – Review of Applicable Laws and Policies ............... 8 
A. City Conflicts of Interest Laws, Rules, and Advisory Opinions .................. 8 
B. Federal Hatch Act ......................................................................................... 9 
C. Official New York City Citywide Social Media Policy ............................... 10 
D. NYPD Policies and Training ....................................................................... 12 
E. City Council Policies .................................................................................... 16 
F. Other City Agency Policies ......................................................................... 16 
IV. An Analysis Part II - NYPD’s Social Media Processes ............................ 17 
A. Compliance with the Citywide Policy ......................................................... 17 
B. Oversight of Executive Accounts ................................................................ 19 
V. An Analysis Part III – NYPD’s Engagement on X .................................... 20 
A. Discussion .................................................................................................... 39 
VI. Conclusion – Findings and Recommendations ........................................ 39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 2  
 
I. Executive Summary 
  
“We can disagree without being disagreeable. It takes courage to stick to 
your convictions, but it takes humility and wisdom to recognize the 
humanity of those who hold opposing views.”— former United States 
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright 
 
In today’s digital landscape, social media has become a dominant platform for public 
discourse, enabling private citizens, public officials, and government agencies to 
exchange ideas, voice opinions, and engage with one another on critical issues. Social 
media has expanded opportunities for public and private individuals to express their 
views and to communicate directly with one another . Indeed, these platforms have 
become effective vehicles for transparent, constructive, and informative engagement 
between government agencies and the communities they serve.  But use of social 
media can also heighten emotions and escalate conflicts , leading to  disrespectful 
interactions that might not  occur in face -to-face conversations, thereby alienat ing 
individuals and groups, and diminishing trust in government. It is therefore critical 
that government entities use social media respectfully and thoughtfully, in order to 
foster understanding, dispel misinformation , and to diffuse conflict rather than 
intensify it.  
 
New York City is fortunate to be home to diverse communities and individuals who 
hold a wide range of opinions. Our municipal institutions are responsible for serving 
each and every person . To that end, New York City residents expect and deserve  
respectful and courteous communication from their public officials —elected and 
appointed—when they are speaking to the public and to each other, including with 
respect to matters on which public officials may strongly disagree. This investigation, 
prompted by a request from  New York  City Council (“City Council”) Speaker 
Adrienne Adams, has focused on certain conversations via social media between 
members of the New York City Police Department’s (“NYPD” or “the Department”) 
leadership and City Council Members, journalists, and other members of the public. 
It is the Office of the Inspector General for the New York City Police Department’s 
(“OIG-NYPD” or “the Office”)view that those conversations  on which this report 
focuses were at times disrespectful and dis courteous. T his report explores those 
conversations and proposes policy and procedural reforms to improve the level of 
conversation involving public officials via social media.
  
 
                                            
 * DOI Commissioner Jocelyn E. Strauber and Inspector General Jeanene L. Barrett thank the staff of OIG-NYPD 
for their work on this investigation and Report, specifically, Percival Rennie, Deputy Inspector General; Crystal 
Ynoa, Investigative Project Analyst; Annette B. Almazan, First Deputy Inspector General; Maria Paolillo, Special 
Counsel to the Inspectors General ; and Rebecca Ch asan, Director of Intergovernmental Affairs and Special 
Counsel. Commissioner Strauber and Inspector General Barrett also thank the New York City Police Department 
and representatives of other organizations for their assistance and cooperation in this investigation. 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 3  
 
On May 3, 2024, DOI’s OIG-NYPD received a letter from Speaker Adams requesting 
that the Office investigate NYPD’s “policies, practices, and operations related to its 
use of social media.” In the letter, the Speaker alleged that the Department’s use of 
its official social media accounts demonstrated “a deeply troubling pattern and 
practice” of “target[ing] public officials and members of the public with invective that 
can plainly be construed as intimidating and dangerous.”  Speaker Adams included  
several examples of posts by NYPD leadership that in her view were part of that 
pattern.  
 
In response to Speaker Adams’s request for an investigation of NYPD’s use of social 
media, t he Mayor’s office publicly requested that any investigation also take into 
consideration “the small number of council members” who use “social media to make 
disparaging comments against the hardworking public servants of our city.”
1 
 
In light of the jurisdiction and mandate of the Office of the Inspector General for 
NYPD, this investigation primarily focused on the policies, procedures, and practices 
of NYPD, as well as certain NYPD social media posts and the broader social media 
conversations in which those posts occurred. These broader conversations included 
posts by a City Council Member, journalists, and other members of the public . For 
NYPD, social media–and specifically the platform X (formerly known as Twitter)–has 
become an essential tool for communicating crime prevention efforts, addressing 
community safety,  highlighting the good work of the Department, as well as  
countering what the Department perceives as misinformation and clarifying relevant 
facts.2 NYPD views X as particularly valuable for these purposes due to X’s real-time 
communication capabilities and wide reach.  
 
In light of NYPD’s broad and consequential mission “to enhance the quality of life in 
New York City by working in partnership with the community to enforce the law, 
preserve peace, protect the people, reduce fear, and maintain order,”3 the Department 
has a special relationship with, and duty to, the public. NYPD must be mindful that 
the content and tenor of its public communications can cause fear, and can otherwise 
negatively impact its relationship with the community , particularly if senior NYPD 
leadership are deemed to be targeting and ridiculing community leaders and 
members with whom they disagree. Over the past year,  there have been complaints 
and reports that a small number of the social media posts made by NYPD or its 
                                            
1 Rivoli, Dan, NYPD social media posts under probe by city investigator, Spectrum News, (May 8. 2024, 
8:35 PM, https://ny1.com/nyc/all-boroughs/politics/2024/05/08/nypd-social-media-investigation.  
2 Meeting with then-Deputy Commissioner of Public Information Tarik Sheppard on August 30, 2024.  
3 See PG §200-02, Mission, Vision, and Values of the New York City Police Department, Apr. 3, 2019, 
page 1. Values. https://www.nyc.gov/site/nypd/about/about-nypd/mission.page 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 4  
 
executives have been aggressive, combative, and generally not conducive to a 
productive public discourse.4  
 
To provide context for its review of NYPD’s social media use and policies, and to 
inform the findings and recommendations in this report, OIG -NYPD also reviewed 
the policies and practices of other City agencies. Additionally, the O ffice analyzed 
social media post s linked to “conversations” involving NYPD senior leadership, as 
well as posts to which NYPD responded and that were referenced in the complaints 
mentioned above. As detailed in this report, NYPD is subject to different policies and 
regulations than elected officials and members of the public with respect to its use of 
social media, as well as different legal restrictions with respect to political 
communications. Similarly, journalists are subject to professional standards with 
respect to their public communications, but their speech is not governed by the same 
set of laws, rules, and policies that apply to government officials. 
 
For purposes of social media use, NYPD is governed by the federal Hatch Act, the 
City’s conflicts of interest laws and regulations, NYPD policies, and Citywide policies. 
OIG-NYPD’s investigation revealed a need for NYPD to strengthen  its policies and 
procedures, specifically regarding social content creation and approval, to ensure that 
Department officials communicating from official Department accounts speak in a 
manner that is respectful and professional. City officials, including NYPD executives, 
City Council M embers, and others should use social media  to convey valuable 
information to the public, to build trust and to be transpar ent, and to further a 
respectful public dialogue and disagreement—not to insult and diminish those with 
different points of view.  
 
OIG-NYPD’s findings include:  
 
1. Certain X posts made by members of NYPD’s executive staff  on official City 
accounts were unprofessional and encouraged an unproductive public 
discourse. The  posts violated Department policies related to acting with 
courtesy and civility.  The posts raise questions with respect to whether they 
may be deemed prohibited engagement in political activity by City employees, 
but DOI reaches no conclusion on this issue. 
 
2. Several of NYPD’s practices regarding social media are not in compliance with 
the Citywide Social Media Policy to which all City agencies are required to 
adhere. For example, some NYPD soc ial media accounts are not registered 
with the Mayor’s Office of Creative Communications nor did NYPD seek or 
                                            
4 Ngo, Emily, With backing of Eric Adams, NYPD brass escalates social media brawls,  Politico (May 
8. 2024, 7: 53 PM, https://www.politico.com/news/2024/05/08/eric -adams-nypd-escalate-social-media-
brawl-00156895. 
 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 5  
 
receive approval from that office for the creation of individual official social 
media accounts for executives other than the Commissioner.  
 
3. NYPD’s official use of social media policy (dated December 2, 2022) has not 
been updated to include all of the requirements of the most recent C itywide 
Social Media Policy that was issued in June 2023. Notably, NYPD’s policy does 
not describe the roles and res ponsibilities of the staff members who manage 
the agency’s social media communications, the internal approval process for 
content, or how complaints about NYPD’s social media communications should 
be addressed. 
 
4. NYPD’s use of social media policy does not p rovide rules or guidance about 
what content and language is appropriate to be posted from an official 
Department account.  
 
5. NYPD executives with individual social media accounts operate their accounts 
without sufficient oversight and outside the supervision of the office of NYPD’s 
Deputy Commissioner of Public Information.  
 
6. Aside from a discussion during the Department’s Basic Management 
Operations Course, NYPD does not provide formal training to NYPD 
executives with individual social media accounts re garding appropriate 
content for posting and the public impact of social media communications , 
although it does do so for Digital Communications Officers who are responsible 
for managing command-level social media accounts. 
 
7. NYPD  ceased to engage in social med ia exchanges that used discourteous 
language and targeted particular individuals in early May 2024, following 
public criticism of the posts discussed in this report and a request for a DOI 
investigation by  City Council Speaker Adrienne Adams.    
 
Based on these findings, OIG-NYPD makes the following six recommendations.  
 
1. Memorialize in writing an internal review and approval process for posts on 
executive accounts.  
2. Update all relevant Patrol Guide Procedure and Administrative Guide 
Procedure sections to align with the requirements of the Citywide Social Media 
Policy. 
 
3. Review the Citywide Social Media Policy and ensure NYPD complies with  all 
of its requirements. 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 6  
 
4. Update the Department’s social media use policy to include rules and guidance 
about appropriate  content and language for posting on official Department 
social media accounts. 
 
5. Assign Digital Communications Officers to all social media accounts, including 
at the executive level, to ensure that social media posts are consistent with 
citywide and department policy, and memorialize this requirement in writing. 
6. Provide training to all staff using official agency social media regarding the 
Citywide Social Media Policy, the Department’s social media policy, and best 
practices. 
 
II. Introduction and Background 
 
A. Investigation Initiation 
 
On May 3, 2024, the Office  of the Inspector General for the NYPD (“OIG -NYPD” or 
“the Office”) received a letter from City Council Speaker Adrienne Adams requesting 
that the Office investigate New York City Police Department’s (“ NYPD” or “the 
Department”) “policies, practices and operations related to its use of social media.” In 
the letter, the Speaker alleged that the Department’s use of its official social media 
accounts demonstrated “a deeply troubling pattern and practice” of “target[ing] public 
officials and members of the public with invective that can plainly be construed as 
intimidating and dangerous.” The Speaker further alleged that some posts contained 
inaccurate information, appeared to veer into political activity, and/ or violated City 
laws or policies. Attached to the letter were seven X (formerly known as Twitter) posts 
that raised concerns about NYPD’s use of social media . The posts were associated 
with the  official NYPD X accounts for the Department as a whole (@NYPD news), 
then-NYPD Chief of Patrol John Chell  (@NYPDChiefPatrol), and NYPD Deputy 
Commissioner of Operations Kaz Daughtry  (@NYPDDaughtry). Five of the 
referenced posts were made  by Chief Chell; three responded to posts made by City 
Council Member Tiffany Cabán; one criticized a decision allegedly made by Judge J. 
Machelle Sweeting; and one responded to a post made by Olayemi Olurin, an attorney 
and political commentator . One of the referenced  posts w as made  by Deputy 
Commissioner Daughtry and tagged Harry Siegel, a New York Daily News reporter. 
The last referenced  post was made by NYPDNews and also related to Siegel . Both 
posts were responding to the reporter’s criticism of NYPD efforts on public safety 
specifically in the transit system.  
 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 7  
 
On May 6, 2024, the  Office received a letter from the Legal Aid Society’s Cop 
Accountability Project expressing, among other things, support for Speaker Adams’s 
request for an investigation into NYPD’s use of its official social media accounts. 
 
Separately, in response to Sp eaker Adams’s request, the Mayor’s Office publicly 
requested that any investigation also take into consideration “the small number of 
council members” who use “social media to make disparaging comments against the 
hardworking public servants of our city.” 
 
B. Scope and Methodology 
 
As set forth in the New York City Charter, OIG -NYPD is mandated to investigate, 
review, study, audit, and make recommendations relating to the operations, policies, 
programs, and practices of NYPD.
5 Pursuant to this mandate, and in response to the 
request from the Speaker, the Office  initiated an  investigation focused on the 
Department’s policies, procedures, and activities with respect to its  use of social 
media. Specifically, OIG-NYPD reviewed whether NYPD’s social media use complied 
with the Official New York City Citywide Social Media Policy, the Department’s own 
policies, and  the City’s conflicts of i nterest laws and regulations . The Office  also 
reviewed other City agencies’ social media policies and their use of X.6  
 
In addition, the Office conducted a comprehensive review of all the posts made on 
NYPD X accounts identified in Speaker Adams’s  letter—the agency -wide account, 
Chief Chell ’s account, and Deputy Commissioner Daughtry ’s account—between 
January 2022 through August 2024. As part of this review, OIG-NYPD evaluated not 
only NYPD’s X posts, but also the posts to which they responded . While the focus of 
the analysis was particular to NYPD executive X accounts  and the agency -wide 
account, OIG-NYPD also review ed command-level policies with relation to social 
media use . To aid in its review, OIG- NYPD requested records related to NYPD’s 
official social media accounts and met with NYPD leadership , Co uncil Member 
Cabán, and others who play a role in using or overseeing official Cit y agency social 
media accounts  to understand the intended use of social media c itywide, by the 
Department, and by other City agencies. 
 
 
 
 
                                            
5 See Local Law 70 of 2013. See also N.Y.C. Charter Ch. 34 §803(b). 
6 The official use of social media policies of the New York City Council, Administration for Children’s 
Services, the Department of Corrections, the Department of Education, the Departm ent of 
Investigation, the Department of Sanitation, the Department of Youth and Community Development, 
and the Fire Department of the City of New York were reviewed and are discussed below.  
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 8  
 
III. An Analysis Part I – Review of Applicable Laws and Policies 
 
Government speech and the use of social media by government entities and officials 
is governed by a framework of laws, policies, and procedures.  This section of the 
report reviews the applicable law as relevant to NYPD’s social media posts.  
 
A. City Conflicts of Interest Laws, Rules, and Advisory Opinions 
 
In order to “maintain the perception and reality of integrity in City government,” New 
York City has enacted c onflicts of i nterest laws prohibiting certain conduct by its 
employees, specifically C hapter 68 of the New York City Charter .
7 Pursuant to its 
authority under Chapter 68, the Conflicts of Interest Board (“COIB” or “the Board”), 
which enforces these laws, has adopted rules and issued advisory opinions to further 
explain the parameters of such laws. 
 
Among other things, Chapter 68 regulates the appropriate use of City resources and 
positions and the political activity of public officials in their official capacities. Board 
Rules §§ 1-13(a) and 1-13(b) prohibit the use of City time and City resources for any 
non-City purpose. Board Rule § 1 -13(a) states that “it shall be a violation of City 
Charter § 2604(b)(2) for any public servant to pursue personal and private activities 
during times when the public servant is required to perform services for the City.” 
Board Rule § 1 -13(b) states that “it shall be a violation of City Charter § 2604(b)(2) 
for any public servant to use City letterhead, personnel, equipment, resources, or 
supplies for any non-City purpose.” 
 
COIB, through its advisory opinions, has made it clear that political activit y always 
falls within the prohibition of use of City time or resources for any non-City purpose 
and that there is no “incidental use” exception for political activities.
8 COIB has also 
advised that City agencies and elected or high -level appointed officials that operate 
official City social media accounts ( and appropriately use City time, resources, and 
subordinate personnel to do so) must use these social media accounts only for official 
business, not for political purposes. 9 While the rules do not provide an exhaustive 
definition of a political purpose, political endorsements or campaign fundraisers 
clearly fall within that definition and therefore cannot be announced via official City 
social media accounts.10  
 
The Board distinguishes between different types of social media accounts, including:  
 
                                            
7 NYC Charter, Chapter 68, Sections 2604(b)(9)-(11) 
8 See Conflicts of Interest Board Advisory Opinions 2017-1 and 2012-5. 
9 See Conflicts of Interest Board Advisory Opinion 2017-1, at 4. 
10 See Conflicts of Interest Board Advisory Opinion 2017-1, at 4-7. 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 9  
 
• Official Accounts: Accounts established for City -related duties, such as an 
agency’s social media page, must contain City business information only, and 
are considered government property. These accounts cannot be used for 
political endorsements, fundraising, or campaign activities. For example,  “a 
public servant’s political endorsement is a  personal action, not an official 
action, so that a public servant may not issue political endorsements on City 
letterhead and may not otherwise use City resources [such as an official social 
media account] or staff in connection with a political endorsement.”
11 
 
• Personal Accounts : While personal accounts are generally separate from 
City resources, elected officials are permitted to repost content from the ir 
official City account on their personal account . However, their staff, who are 
City employees, cannot contribute content to the official's personal account. If 
that occurs, that may be a violation of conflicts of interest laws and rules.12 
B. Federal Hatch Act  
The Hatch Act, a federal law passed in 1939, limits certain political activities of 
federal employees, as well as some states, the District of C olumbia, and local 
government employees who work in connection with federally funded programs. 13 
The law , in  part, seeks to ensure that federal programs are administered in a 
nonpartisan fashion.14 NYPD employees are covered by the Hatch Act.15 
 
Among other things, t he Hatch Act forbids covered employees from using their 
authority or influence to interfere with or  affect the results of an election. 16 Use of 
covered employees ’ official social media accounts are governed by the Hatch Act. 
According to federal guidance, any social media account created in a covered 
employee’s official capacity should be limited to official business matters in order to 
                                            
11 Conflicts of Interest Board Advisory Opinion 2017-1, at 4. 
12 Id. 
13 USCS § 1501. 
14 U.S. Office of Special Counsel, Hatch Act Overview, available at: Hatch Act Overview (osc.gov).  
15 Individuals employed by a state or local agency whose principal employment is in connection with 
an activity financed in whole or in part by loans or grants made by the United States or federal agency 
are covered by the Hatch Act. Local police department employees are covered by the Hatch Act unless, 
there exists a “compliance program to shield [the officer] from activities connected to the use of federal 
funds.” US Office of Special Counsel, Advisory Opinion 2015, available at 
https://osc.gov/Documents/Hatch%20Act/Advisory%20Opinions/Federal/Social%20Media%20and%20
Email%20FAQs.pdf  NYPD receives federal funding and this exception does not apply , therefore its 
employees are covered by the Hatch Act. 
16 The Hatch Act forbids using social media accounts to engage in political activity. Covered employees 
may not (1) use their authority or influence to interfere with or affect the result of an electio n, (2) 
coerce, command, or advise a state or local employee to make political contributions, or (3) run for 
elective office, unless the election involves only nonpartisan candidates . USCS § 1501 -1502; see also 
Perkins v. Office of Special Counsel, 522 F.3d 1373, 1375 (Fed. Cir. 2008). 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 10  
 
remain politically neutral. Any political activity must be confined to employee’s 
personal social media account, subject to any other applicable limitations.  Federal 
guidance further explains that “political activity” refers to any activity directed at the 
success or failure of a political party or partisan political group or candidate in a 
partisan race.
17 
 
C. Official New York City Citywide Social Media Policy  
 
All City agencies are required to follow the  Official New York C ity Citywide Social 
Media Policy  (“the Citywide Policy”), which was last updated in June 2023.  The 
Citywide Policy  “provides overall guidance for official New York City government 
social media accounts.”18 It applies to “anyone managing a social media accou nt for 
an agency,” but does not apply to “[i]ndividuals using their own personal accounts.”19  
 
According to the Citywide Policy, social media allows agencies “to develop stronger 
and more successful relationships with residents, visitors, and other customers,” by: 
 
• Promoting agency programs and initiatives; 
• Providing agency customers with an additional medium to interact with the 
City; 
• Acting as a service provider and connect ing New Yorkers with programs or 
information; 
• Complementing and integrating traditional media for wider message 
distribution; and 
• Engaging in national and regional discussions on relevant City issues.20 
 
The policy requires that all official City social media accounts and their respective 
points of contact be registered with the Mayor’s Office of Creative Communications 
(“Creative Comms”), which is tasked with maintaining an account directory. Those  
accounts must be linked to a social media management platform called Hootsuite by 
an agency’s registered user. 21 Hootsuite enables the City  to streamline the 
management of its  social media accounts. The Citywide Policy also requires that 
every City agency have a designated representative for its respective agency’s digital 
                                            
17 US Office of Special Counsel, Advisory Opinion 2015, available at 
https://osc.gov/Documents/Hatch%20Act/Advisory%20Opinions/Federal/Social%20Media%20and%20
Email%20FAQs.pdf 
18 See Official New York City Citywide Social Media Policy, Jun. 2023, 1, at Introduction. 
19 Id. 
20 See Official New York City Citywide Social Media Policy, Jun. 2023, 1, at Introduction.  
21 See Official New York City Citywide Social Media Policy, Jun. 2023, 1, at Administration of Social 
Media and 3, at Hoots uite. Hootsuite is a social media management tool that provides its users with 
the ability to oversee and manage multiple accounts. For more information regarding Hootsuite, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zFVpnYGvUKY&list=PLZIVGxSkBDc2FcmBe8c7ZcSLYcNOOw
K_7, last accessed Jul. 4, 2024. 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 11  
 
communications efforts on the NYC Digital Slack platform (“Digi Slack”).22 DigiSlack 
is a communication platform designed to facilitate internal collaboration  that could 
include communication amongst employees. It operates like a group chat.23  
 
Under the Citywide Policy, in order to create a new social media account, agencies 
must submit a proposal to Creative Comms detailing the agency’s goals and needs 
with respect to that social media account , and its staff’s capacity to manage the 
account.
24 Creative Comms is empowered to refuse an agency permission to create a 
new social media account. Accounts may be created “to represent agency heads, and 
the heads of mayoral agencies, offices, or units, in their official capacity.” 25 The 
Citywide Policy states that accounts “may not be created for deputy commissioners, 
deputy directors, or any other staff other than agency heads.”26 An agency may seek 
an exception  to this policy  from Creative Comms  if the agency wishes to create 
accounts for these individuals.  
 
If social media accounts are created for members of agency leadership in their official 
capacities (“executive accounts”), the Citywide Policy requires that the accounts  
display the official’s title rather than their name. For example, in the case of Mayor 
Adams’s official social media account , @NYCMayor is permitted while @EricAdams 
is not.
27  
 
Agency accounts must be identified as City-related via a statement in the bio that the 
account is an official government account and by including the New York City bubble-
letter or agency icon in the profile image, among other requirements.
28 Agency 
accounts also must  include the direction to the public to “Call 911 for emergencies; 
call or direct message @NYC311 for non-emergencies.” Agency social media accounts 
must be included on the City’s central webpage listing all City agencies’ official social 
media accounts.29 
 
                                            
22 See Official New York City Citywide Social Media Policy, Jun. 2023, 1-2, at Administration of Social 
Media. Digi Slack is a virtual community for all City social media managers to share resources and 
communicate with their peers. 
23 https://www.nyc.gov/nyc-resources/nyc-digital-slack-group-request.page 
24 See Official New York City Citywide Social Media Policy, Jun. 2023, 2, at Account Creation.  
25 Id. 
26 See Official New York City Citywide Social Media Policy, Jun. 2023, 2, at Account Creation.  
27 See Official New York City Citywide Social Media Policy, Jun. 2023, 2, at Accounts for Official 
Individuals. 
28 Id. 
29 Official New York City Citywide Social Media Policy, Jun. 2023, 5, at Branding Social media 
Accounts. Agency Policies a nd Procedures. The Citywide policy references 
https://www1.nyc.gov/connect/social-media.page, but that link takes you to the web address referenced 
where all official social media channels are to be listed.  
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 12  
 
The Citywide Policy applies to all employees involved in an agency’s social media 
program and also directs each agency to “develop an organizational structure and 
agency-specific Social Media policy…approved by such agency’s legal counsel.”30 The 
Citywide Policy details the minimum elements that must be included in the agency -
specific policy, including the development of internal approval processes and 
appropriate oversight for social media use.
31 These requirements include, but are not 
limited to: oversight of all social media accounts managed by the agency (whether 
developed internally or through a vendor or consultant), clearly delineated roles and 
responsibilities for all staff members managing the agency’s s ocial media 
communications, and an internal approval process for all content.32 
 
The Citywide P olicy states that, “S ocial Media accounts cannot be used to share 
content from a campaign or non -governmental account of active politicians. In 
addition, a City Social Media account may neve r be used to urge the public to act in 
support of a particular political position .” Notably, the Citywide Policy does not 
provide guidance on the type of language that should be used in posts, or prohibit 
posts that target individuals, or are offensive, unprofessional, or harassing.  
 
D. NYPD Policies and Training  
 
As referenced above, the Citywide Policy requires that every City agency develop its 
own agency-specific policies and procedures concerning official use of social media. 
OIG-NYPD reviewed NYPD’s policies, procedures, and training materials  related to 
its use of social media , as well as the Department’s  conflicts of interest policies, 
including guidance as to political activities . NYPD’s social media policies and 
procedures are contained within its P atrol Guide (“PG”) and Administrative Guide 
(“AG”) procedures.
33 Below is a summary of NYPD’s relevant policies and procedures. 
 
Patrol Guide Section 200-02: Mission, Vision and Values of the New York City Police 
Department 
 
The stated mission of NYPD “is t o enhance the quality of life in New York City by 
working in partnership with the community to enforce the law, preserve peace, 
                                            
30 See Official New York City Citywide Social Media Policy, Jun. 2023, 4, at Agency Policies and 
Procedures. 
31 See Official New York City Citywide Social Media Policy, Jun. 2023, 4, at Agency Policies and 
Procedures. 
32 See Official New York City Citywide Social Media Policy, Jun. 2023, 4, at Agency Policies and 
Procedures. 
33 NYPD department PG & AG’s can be accessed publicly. However, provision AG 304-19 could not be 
accessed directly, reference was made to it in another provision (303-01).  Training materials discussed 
are not publicly available. All information was provided by the Department for review. 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 13  
 
protect the people, reduce fear, and maintain order.” 34 In partnership with the 
community, NYPD pledges to “[m]aintain a higher s tandard of integrity than is 
generally expected of others because so much is expected of [the Department ].”35 
NYPD further pledges to  “[v]alue human life, respect the dignity of each individual 
and render [its] services with courtesy and civility.” 36 Until r ecently, many of the 
Department’s vehicles bore the slogan Courtesy, Professionalism, and Respect. 37 
While NYPD has not discussed publicly the values that guide its social media use, it 
is fair to expect NYPD to meet these same high standards in all of its public 
interactions, including on social media. 
 
Administrative Guide Section 304-19: Department Social Media Accounts and Policy 
 
Administrative Guide Procedure  304-19 provides guidelines for the “establishment, 
management, administration, oversight, and  use” of the Department’s social media 
accounts. This AG section was not updated following updates to the Citywide P olicy 
regarding social media in 2023 . Nevertheless, consistent with the Citywide Policy , 
the AG 304- 19 states  that NYPD uses social media “t o enhance and support 
Department program goals and objectives, as well as, to serve as a mechanism for 
communication between the public and the Department.”
38 Many of the requirements 
for agency-specific policies in the Citywide Policy are not included in NYPD’s policy, 
including those related to Hootsuite or Digi Slack, an internal process for content 
approval, or a process for addressing complaints. Further, while NYPD’s policy 
addresses the creation of new social media account s and handling of compromised  
accounts, NYPD policy does not require that Creative Comms  be involved in 
establishing a new account . NYPD policy also does not discuss appropriate content 
for posts on official NYPD social media accounts.39  
 
 
 
Administrative Guide Section 303-17: Digital Communications Officer 
                                            
34 PG § 200-02, Mission, Vision, and Values of the New York City Police Department, Apr. 3, 2019, 
page 1, Mission. 
35 PG § 200-02, Mission, Vision, and Values of the New York City Police Department, Apr. 3,  2019, 
page 1Values. 
36 Id. 
37 In July 2024, NYPD started using a new decal on new vehicles which reads “Fighting Crime, 
Protecting the Public.” Based on information received by this Office, the Department maintains the 
Courtesy, Professionalism & Respect decal on its existing vehicles. 
38 AG §304-19, Department Social Media Accounts and Policy, Dec. 2, 2022, 2, at Additional Data, 
Social Media: Policy Considerations. 
39 A prior iteration of the Department’s social media policy that was issued on December 4, 20 18, 
included the sentence: “ Members of the service utilizing personal social media sites are to exercise 
good judgment and demonstrate the same degree of professionalism expected of them while performing 
their official duties.” However, the current policy does not include this directive. 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 14  
 
 
Digital Communications Officers (“DCOs”) are responsible for NYPD’s social media 
accounts at the command level—precinct, police service area, transit district, or select 
bureaus/commands.
40 However, there is no DCO or equivalent role in the Department 
with respect to the Department’s main X account, @NYPDNews, or NYPD executive 
accounts. 
 
DCOs coordinate with the Office of the Deputy Commissioner of Public Information  
(“DCPI”), which is responsible for providing “the most accurate an d timely 
information to the public” and for “communication, reputational management, and 
facilitating citywide news coverage for members of the press .”
41 DCOs coordinate 
with DCPI regarding account establishment, maintenance, training, messaging, and 
support.”
42 DCOs are responsible for branding social media accounts, using the 
commanding officer’s portrait and name in the account profile, monitoring accounts, 
and working with the commanding officer.
43 While DCOs must seek approval from 
their commanding officers before posting,44 they do not need to consult with DCPI or 
obtain that office’s approval prior to posting. 
 
At the command -level, it is the responsibility of DCOs to “[d]evelop innovative and 
informative Department social media messaging with the goal of  cultivating public 
engagement.”
45 They are tasked with coordinating with relevant individuals to post 
information about traffic conditions, wanted/missing persons flyers, crime prevention 
tips and awareness, as well as community events, as appropriate.46 
 
NYPD Social Media Strategy for Digital Communications Officers 
 
The Office also reviewed a document concerning DCO training, created by DCPI. The 
training describes the purpose of the command -level accounts as “hyper-local” 
messaging to highlight precinct/b orough events, meetings, street closures, and 
community collaboration.” 47 The training also provides information about using 
Hootsuite, as required by the Citywide Policy, for social media posts, provides tips for 
creating posts (including examples of good and bad post s), and describes topics 
                                            
40 AG §303-17, Digital Communications Officer, Apr. 26, 2022, 1, at Procedure. 
41N.Y.P.D., Public Information webpage, 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/nypd/bureaus/administrative/public-information.page, (last accessed Nov. 7, 
2024). 
42 See AG §303-17, Digital Communications Officer, Apr. 26, 2022, Id. at page 1, section 1. sat 1.  
43 See AG 303-17, Digital Communications Officer Apr. 26, 2022, at Id. at page 1, sections 1(c), 2.  
44 See AG 303-17, Digital Communications Officer, Apr. 26, 2022, at Id. at page 1, section 3. 
45 See AG 303-17, Digital Communications Officer, Apr. 26, 2022, at Id. at page 1, section 5.  
46 See AG 303-17, Digital Communications Officer, Apr. 26, 2022, Id. at pages 1-2, sections 1-2 and, 5-
14. 
47 NYPD Strategy for Social Media, Digital Communications Officer, undated, at 01 Strategy.  
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 15  
 
appropriate for posting.48 However, there is no mention of the Citywide policy or the 
requirement that Creative Comms approve the creation of a new command -level 
account. The training instructs DCOs that promoting any political messages in posts, 
and responding to posts that may have tagged the respective account claiming officer 
wrongdoing are prohibited. 49 The social media training, like NYPD’s social media 
policy, does not expressly caution staff to consider tone or mai ntain professionalism 
when drafting official social media content.50  
 
According to DCPI,  NYPD executives do not receive the same comprehensive training 
as Digital Communications Officers (DCOs). Instead, there is a DCPI component of 
the Department’s Basic Management Operations Course (“BMOC”), which  officers 
receive when being promoted, that  includes social media usage and public 
speaking.51  However, Chief Chell and Deputy C ommisioner Daughtry stated in 
meetings with this Office that they did not receive s ocial media training when they 
were promoted to their current roles, which includes individual social media accounts 
that they control . Notably, DCPI said that NYPD executives with official agency 
accounts operate with significant autonomy regarding their social media activity. 
This independence includes the ability to designate another NYPD employee to draft 
or post content at their direction, though Chief Chell and Deputy C ommissioner 
Daughtry stated that at times they post directly to their social media accounts 
themselves.
52 While executives are required to inform DCPI of any designee, DCPI 
does not otherwise manage or oversee executive social media activity. 
 
Administrative Guide Section 304-06: Prohibited Conduct 
 
AG 304-06, issued on December 28, 2023,  describes prohibited conduct by members 
of the Department . Specifically, it prohibits members of service while on duty from 
“endorsing political candidates or publicly expressing personal view and opinions 
concerning the merits of: 
 
a. Any political party or candidate for public office; 
                                            
48 NYPD Strategy for Social Media, Digital Communications Officer, undated, at 05 Mindful Posting 
and 06 What to Post. 
49 NYPD Strategy for Social Media, Digital Communications Officer, undated, at 02 Do’s and Don’ts. 
50 PG §200-02, Mission, Vision, and Values of the New York City Police Department, Apr. 3, 2019, page 
1. Values. 
51 The Office requested the relevant BMOC training materials and received the DCO training 
materials previously provided in response. OIG-NYPD was advised that the same materials are used 
for BMOC. 
52 While Chief Chell and Deputy Commissioner Daughtry did not receive social media training when 
they were promoted, NYPD informed the Office that designees do receive training. However, the posts 
discussed within this report were not created by designees, but instead by Chief Chell and Deputy 
Commissioner Daughtry.  
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 16  
 
b. Any public policy matter or legislation pending before any 
government body; or 
c. Any matter decided by a public election, except with the 
permission of the Police Commissioner. 
d. Voting on any matter that comes before the community board 
concerning Police Department activities in the district that the 
Board serves.”
53 
 
E. City Council Policies 
 
The New York City Council is comprised of elected Council Members, as well as staff 
who are employed by individual Council Members and a central staff. Policies issued 
by the Mayor or City Hall’s senior leadership of course do not apply to the City 
Council. The City Council’s policy concerning use of official social media accounts is 
part of its Information Technology Policy and Proce dures. This policy prohibits the 
use of City Council resources for political campaigning and specifically outlines what 
staff, including those who work directly for a City Council Member, may do on the 
member’s official social media.
54 
 
The City Council’s Anti-Discrimination and Harassment Policy prohibits City Council 
members and staff from engaging in harassment, both in-person and via social media 
or other virtual means. This policy applies to both official social media accounts and, 
under certain circumstances, personal social media accounts . Personal social media 
accounts are governed by the policy if their use impacts the workplace, violates 
workplace rules, or creates a hostile environment related to the employee's work or 
colleagues.
55 
 
F. Other City Agency Policies 
 
In addition to the Council’s policies, the Office reviewed the social media policies of 
several City agencies, including other uniformed agencies, such as the Department 
of Correction (“DOC”), the Department of Sanitation (“DSNY”), the Fire Department 
of the City of New York ( “FDNY”), Administration for Children’s Services (“ACS”), 
the Department of Education (“DOE”), and the Department of Youth and Community 
Development (“DYCD”). These agencies are subject to the Citywide Policy and the 
Conflicts of Interest Board rules and opinions, and also have their own agency-specific 
policies. These agencies’ policies vary in level of detail and specificity, but all outline 
acceptable uses of social media for employee official and personal accounts. Many 
                                            
53 AG §304-06, Prohibited Conduct, Dec. 28, 2023, page3, section 17. 
54 N.Y.C. Council, Information Technology Po licy and Procedures, Section III, Official Use of Social 
Media. 
55 See the Council of the City of New York Anti -Discrimination and Harassment Policy, Rev. 2/18/22 
at Jun. 2023, 2, at 1-2. 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 17  
 
policies remind employees that they are subject to applicable departmental policies 
while using personal social media accounts and emphasize  that online conduct can 
reflect on their employer agency and impact its work. Moreover, these policies outline 
the process for making official agency posts on social media and provide guidelines 
about acceptable and unacceptable social media use.  
 
Other than NYPD, this Office  is unaware of any agency that  has official individual 
social media accounts for anyone other than the agency head.  
 
IV. An Analysis Part II - NYPD’s Social Media Processes 
 
Based on this Office’s review, NYPD has 142 command level  X accounts. 
Approximately 98 of these accounts are associated with specific commands, such  as 
the 90th Precinct, whose X account is @NYPD90Pct. As detailed below, these accounts 
are managed by DCOs. Postings are reviewed by commanding officers and are subject 
to monitoring by DCPI. Approximately 44 of NYPD’s X accounts are  (or were)  
associated with individuals in specific titles, such as the Chief of Department or the 
Chief of P atrol. OIG-NYPD’s investigation concludes that NYPD’s social media 
policies and practices do not fully comply with the Citywide Policy and that they do 
not provide sufficient oversight of posts made o n executive accounts. This lack of 
compliance and, in particular, the absence of an internal approval process for 
executive account posts —contributed, at least in part, to NYPD’s failure to ensure 
that the posts on its official executive accounts were courteous, accurate, and fully in 
compliance with relevant laws and regulations. 
 
A. Compliance with the Citywide Policy 
 
Based on OIG- NYPD’s analysis, NYPD’s social media policies and practices do not 
fully comply with the Citywide Policy.  T he Citywide Policy  includes certain 
requirements that the Department’s social media policy, AG 304-19, does not include, 
such as: 
 
Citywide Policy AG 304-19 
1. Agency social media accounts must be 
approved and registered with Creative 
Comms.  
 
1. NYPD policy does not mention Creative 
Comms and does not require that NYPD 
social media accounts be approved and 
registered with Creative Comms. 
2. Agency social media policies should 
describe the r oles and responsibilities 
for all staff members managing the 
agency’s social media presence. 
2. NYPD policy does not describe the roles 
and responsibilities for all employees 
managing the agency’s social media 
presence.  
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 18  
 
3. Agency social media policy should 
include an internal approval process 
for all content posted by the agency on 
social media. 
 
3. NYPD policy does not describe any 
internal approval process for posting 
content on social media.  
4. Agency social media policy should 
include a protocol for responding to 
complaints of dangerous conditions or 
other service requests by referring 
customers to NYC.gov/311 or 911. 
4. NYPD policy does not include a protocol 
for responding to a complaint made on 
social media by a member of the public. 
 
5. Agency social media policy should 
include guidance on records 
management, including record 
retention process and storage timelines 
 
5. NYPD policy does not address retention 
of records of social media posts, or any 
internal discussion relating to those posts. 
6. Agency social media policy should 
include guidelines for agency 
consultant/vendor/contractor use of 
social media. 
6. NYPD policy does not include guidelines 
for consultant, vendor, or contractor use 
of social media.
 
 
 
Moreover, in practice, the Citywide Policy requires that all City agency social media 
accounts be listed on the City’s social media accounts webpage. However, only two of 
NYPD’s official X accounts—@NYPDNews and @NYPDRecruit —are listed on that 
website. In an interview with the senior w riter and p roducer of Creative Comms, 
OIG-NYPD was advised there is a limit to the number of accounts that can be listed 
on the City’s webpage. If this limitation does not permit a listing of all NYPD social 
media accounts, the City should expand the webpage’s capability to enable public 
disclosure of all official social media accounts maintained by City agencies, including 
NYPD.  
 
Additionally, none of NYPD’s social media accounts are registered with the citywide 
Hootsuite account overseen by Creative Comms, though they are registered to an 
NYPD-only Hootsuite account overseen by NYPD.
 Creative Comms advised the Office 
that the City’s current Hootsuite contract would not accommodate inclusion of all of 
NYPD’s Hootsuite users. As such, the City should increase the contract capacity to 
accommodate the inclusion of all NYPD users. 
 
Also, as noted above, the Citywide Policy requires Crea tive Comms to approve the 
creation of social media accounts for any individual other than the agency head . 
NYPD has not sought that approval for any of its 142 X accounts. Per DCPI Tarik 
Sheppard, DCPI approves official NYPD social media accounts  and the Department 
encourages the creation of new accounts to enable the communication of more content 
to the public. DCPI Sheppard was unaware that the Citywide Policy required 
approval from Creative Comms for these new accounts. 
 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 19  
 
OIG-NYPD also reviewed 32 of the 142 command level account s associated with 
various l eadership positions for adherence to Citywide Policy requirements, 
specifically whether the name of the handle was appropriate, and whether the bio 
included the required reference to calling 911 and 311.  Of these 32 accounts, 31 
accounts had the correct handle, and 23 accounts provided correct direction to call 
911 for emergencies and 311 for non -emergencies in the form of a small blue box as 
part of the background photo.  
 
Failure to adhere to the C itywide Policy requirements, such as proper account bios, 
accurate handles, and the inclusion of critical references to 911 and 311 services, can 
confuse the public as to whether an account is official or not . This might  raise 
questions about whether information conveyed via that account  is trustworthy, 
creating uncertainty and limiting NYPD’s ability to convey important information in 
emergency situations.  
 
B. Oversight of Executive Accounts 
 
Based on our review, OIG-NYPD finds that NYPD’s policies are insufficient to ensure 
that posts on executive accounts, or other communications by executive accounts via 
social media, are subject to review in a manner that ensures that they are courteous, 
accurate, and in compliance with relevant laws and regulations. As discussed above, 
Chief Chell and Deputy C ommissioner Daughtry explicitly stated that they had not 
received any social media -specific training for their current roles, which includes 
individual social media accounts which they  operate. Executives are not required to 
obtain approval prior to posting on their account. Moreover, beyond generally stating 
that NYPD will “render [its] services with courtesy and civility ,”
 56 NYPD’s policies 
do not provide guidance or rules for appropriate and professional content or language 
to use in social media posts. 
 
According to DCPI Sheppard, NYPD executives are considered subject matter experts 
who do not require review or oversight of their posts or other social media activity . 
Indeed, were DCPI to have questions about the accurac y of executive social media 
posts, they would confer with the executives themselves on those questions . DCPI 
Sheppard also informed OIG-NYPD that NYPD’s work is wide -ranging and fast -
paced and therefore, approval for executive social media posts is not fea sible. 
However, DCPI, the Office of the Deputy Commissioner of Legal Matters (“DCLM”), 
and/or the commissioner may discuss social media usage with executives, including 
during executive meetings. 
 
                                            
56 See PG 200-02, Mission, Vision, and Values of the New York City Police Department, Apr. 3, 2019, 
at Values. 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 20  
 
As discussed in more detail in the next section, the lack o f oversight of executive 
accounts, and the lack of policies and training about what is appropriate for posting, 
allowed certain executives to make a number of posts that were not reviewed by 
others in the Department . It should be noted that Chief Chell and  Deputy 
Commissioner Daughtry advised OIG -NYPD that they drafted these posts 
themselves, not their designees. These posts personally targeted individuals deemed 
to be critical of or disrespectful to law enforcement with insulting language, including 
name calling and mockery. The posts were discourteous, dismissive, demeaning and 
could have been —and were in some instances —perceived as threatening or 
intimidating to the individuals referenced. The se NYPD  posts were plainly 
inappropriate and regrettable uses of official City social media accounts, even if these 
posts were made in response to posts by third parties directed to the Department that 
were unnecessarily inflammatory and unproductive , and at times , factually 
inaccurate. 
 
NYPD appropriately ceased to e ngage in  social media exchanges that used 
discourteous language and targeted particular individuals  as of early May 2024 . 
NYPD represented to this Office in the course of this  investigation that NYPD now 
exercises more oversight over executive accounts. Fo r example, the Department has 
directed that its executives refrain from responding directly to public criticism or 
tagging individuals in posts. This measure was designed to depersonalize interactions 
and reduce the risk of inflammatory exchanges and is consistent with the existing 
restrictions on command- level social media account usage. The Department also 
encourages executives to consult with the DCLM should potential posts raise policy 
or legal questions. This guidance is intended to maintain a consistent and thoughtful 
tone across the Department’ s platforms, particularly when addressing sensitive 
topics.  
 
While this new approach represents a significant step forward, it remains an informal 
practice rather than a written policy. A written policy would e nsure a uniform 
understanding of NYPD’s expectations with respect to social media posting. 
 
V. An Analysis Part III – NYPD’s Engagement on X 
 
According to NYPD, the Department uses social media as a means of outreach to the 
community and to convey NYPD’s narrative. Specifically, social media is used to 
communicate crime prevention efforts, address community safety, highlight the good 
work of the Department, as well as counter what it perceives as  misinformation and 
clarify facts .
57 In early 2024, @NYPDChiefofPa trol, @NYPDDaughtry, and 
@NYPDNews began using social media to engage in direct and sometimes hostile 
exchanges with City Council Members, advocates, and members of the press. Based 
                                            
57 As noted by DCPI Tarik Sheppard during a meeting on August 30, 2024. 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 21  
 
on interviews, then-Chief of Patrol Chell and Deputy Commissioner Daughtry  took 
the position that this use of social media was necessary to address criticism  of the 
Department that they deemed to be unfair or to be based on misinformation . The 
Mayor expressed support for NYPD’s use of social media, stating, “I don’t think they 
attacked anyone, if a columnist has a right to an opinion, a police officer has the right 
to an opinion.”58 
 
These types of exchanges continued for about five months until approximately May 
2024. At that time, the Department ceased to engage in these types o f exchanges on 
social media, and Department posts, including from executive accounts, resumed a 
professional tone. Based on meetings conducted by this Office, NYPD did not change 
its written policies nor did City Hall direct the Department to use a less co mbative 
tone. Rather, the Department recognized that it could respond effectively to criticism 
without creating a public backlash, including by refraining from directly responding 
to criticism or tagging individuals via social media and by consulting with the DCLM 
where appropriate prior to posting. 
 
OIG-NYPD reviewed all of the X posts made between January 2022 through 
September 2024 for @NYPDChiefofPatrol, @NYPDDaughtry, and @NYPDNews, as 
well as the posts of other individuals, including journalists and Council members, to 
which these NYPD posts, at times, were responding. These accounts were specifically 
identified in Speaker Adams’s letter.  
 
During this timeframe, there were a total of 10,327 posts across the three official 
NYPD accounts referenced abov e. There were 7,134 posts from the @NYPDNews 
account, 2,284 from the @NYPDChiefofPatrol account, and 909 posts from the 
@NYPDDaughtry account, respectively. The vast majority of the posts from all three 
accounts were informat ive, courteous, and appropriate . However, the Office did 
identify some problematic posts , which were  primarily posted from the 
@NYPDChiefofPatrol and @NYPDDaughtry accounts, not @NYPDNews. 
 
Several of the problematic posts this Office identified used hostile or negative 
language, either generally or directed towards a particular individual . OIG-NYPD 
finds that these posts were inappropriate, offensive, and unprofessional and violated 
the Patrol Guide’s mandate to render services with courtesy and civility.  However, 
because neither the Ci tywide Policy nor Department’s social media policy expressly 
prohibit or even provide guidance concerning appropriate language for social media 
posts, the Office cannot conclude that the posts violated these policies. 
 
                                            
58 Donaldson, Sahalie,. "Adams defends NYPD’s 'right to have an opinion,'” City & State New York, 02 
April, 02, 2024., https://www.cityandstateny .com/politics/2024/04/adams-defends-nypds-right-have-
opinion/395415/ / 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 22  
 
This Office also identified two posts that could be interpreted as  engagement in 
political activity, as defined by the City’s c onflicts of interest laws and regulations , 
the Hatch Act, or the Department’s prohibited conduct policy, as some public officials 
have alleged.59 As discussed in more detail below, it is unclear whether, as a matter 
of law and regulation, these posts in fact constitute prohibited engagement in political 
activity, but the posts’ language certainly raise that question,  
 
Some of the problematic posts, including the nine provided by Speaker Adams in her 
referral, were closely examined  by this Office  and are discussed below. In order to 
give full context to the online conversation preceding or following NYPD’s posts, posts 
by other  parties in conversation with these NYPD executive accounts also were 
examined and are discussed below, where relevant. In doing so, this Office recognizes 
that different laws and rules apply to different communications based on the role of 
the person posting and whether the account is an official City resource or a personal 
account.  
 
Conversation #1: Judge’s Decision to Not Jail 
Arrestee Pending Trial60 
 
On February 27, 2024, Chief Chell posted on X 
about a New York State Criminal Court judge’s 
decision to not incarcerate a particular arrestee 
who was arrested on felony charges. Chief Chell 
stated in the post that NYPD and the District 
Attorney did their jobs by arresting and charging 
the person, but “the Honorable Judge Sweeting” 
failed to do her job by releasing “a predator back 
into the community, who may be on your next train, 
or walking the streets of our city, looking for his 
next victim.” Here, Chief Chell accused an Acting 
New York Supreme Court Justice of failing to do 
her job, when in fact he simply disagreed with a 
decision she made in her  professional capacity. He 
also suggested that she would be responsible for 
future acts of violence by a defendant she had 
released, an inflammatory and speculative 
allegation. In light of recent threats of violence, and 
acts of violence against judges, na ming and 
                                            
59 See, e.g., @tiffany_caban, TWITTER (X) (May. 10, 2024, 2:07 PM), 
https://x.com/tiffany_caban/status/1788994400607179161 and @Andrew S. Becker TWITTER (X) (May 
12, 2024, 12:19AM) https://x.com/Andrew_S_Becker/status/1789510632397824147Letter to Mayor re. 
Chell w/ Signatures. 
60 https://x.com/NYPDChiefPatrol/status/1762621762670334209 

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 23  
 
criticizing an individual justice, and claiming that the justice has created a safety 
risk to the community could potentially put the justice at risk of harm.61 
 
Chief Chell told th e Office that he  posted this statement, and others with similar 
messages about recidivists being released on bail, because he thought it was a public 
safety issue and he wanted people to know the consequences of judges’ decisions. The 
Office identified at least two additional posts by Chief Chell about recidivism.  
 
After Chief Chell’s original post, Deputy 
Commissioner Daughtry amplified the 
message mockingly stating “it’s time for 
another episode of the “Revolving Door of NYC 
Criminal Justice!” ” Deputy Commissioner 
Daughtry similarly told this Office that he 
posted this because he wanted to hold someone 
accountable for letting alleged criminals back 
out on the streets and to make clear that 
NYPD had upheld its obligation  by arresting 
these individuals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These posts were unprofessional and inappropriate. Senior leadership of NYPD who 
disagree with judges do not promote “accountability” by naming (accurately or 
inaccurately) and publicly criticizing j udges for  decisions that are made in their 
professional capacities and based on their interpretation of the appli cable law. Nor 
do these posts meaningfully advance a dialogue  on issues such as public safety, 
recidivism, or bail. Furthermore, the posts inaccurately named Justice Sweeting, who 
was not involved in Faulkner’s case.  
                                            
61 For example, one reply to Chief Chell’s post stated “This is sickening. I wonder where the judge 
resides. Or if she takes the subway at all. Or which train or stops she rides?” 
https://x.com/haileriverabx/status/1762685506972725409. This type of rhetoric is particularly 
concerning in light of recent violence against judges.  

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 24  
 
 
Once the press pointed out the misidentification of the judge, Council Member Tiffany 
Cabán commented from her personal account, tagging the Mayor, 62 that NYPD 
executives spreading misinformation is “shameful, disgusting, and dangerous.” This 
response—which also uses unnecessarily inflammatory language to describe the 
conduct of NYPD —only serves to heighten hostilities in a context where all public 
officials involved should be seeking, and setting an example of, a more civil public 
dialogue.  
 
                                            
62 Council Member Cab án informed this Office that as a genera l rule, she does not tag or reference 
individuals by name in her social media posts, with the exception of the Mayor.  

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 25  
 
Later that day, NYPD DCPI posted a 
statement claiming that they had received 
inaccurate information about the identity of 
the judge, but that despite their error they 
“stand firm in our belief of judges being held 
accountable for their decisions.” Chief Chell 
reposted NYPD’s post stating “Facts matter 
– but the story does NOT change! I was 
given incorrect information through 
numerous verifications as to which judge 
released this individual. My post, my 
responsibility! With that, an apology is owed 
to the Honorable Judge Machelle Sweeting.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conversation #2: Mayor Adams’s Interview on The Breakfast Club and 
Detective Jonathan Diller’s Death
63 
 
On March 29, 2024, Mayor Eric Adams made an appearance on The Breakfast Club, 
a nationally syndicated radio show. During this appearance , Mayor Adams was 
interviewed by guest commentator Olayemi Olurin . Ms. Olurin is a former public 
                                            
63 Police Officer Diller was posthumously promoted to Detective First Grade. 

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 26  
 
defender who had previously stated that she believes Mayor Adams is “the worst 
mayor in America.” 64 After the interview aired, it was widely viewed and quickly 
became “a viral political sensation [that] seemingly everyone with an interest in city 
politics watched, regardless of their background.”65 The interview was subsequently 
described as “heated” and “fiery.”66  
 
The interview took place shortly after the murder of NYPD Detective Jonathan Diller 
in Queens on March 25, 2024, who was shot  in the line of duty  while conducting a 
traffic stop. Segments of the interview addressed public safety and NYPD. Ms. Olurin 
referenced Detective Diller’s death, stating to Mayor Adams “[i] n the same breath 
that you want to sensationalize, we want to highlight and point out how an officer 
was killed the other day, which is a rare occurrence across the United States but let 
alone in New York, New York police officers have killed at least seven people this 
year, including a 19 -year-old.”
67 Mayor Adams responded that he was not “going to 
dismiss the loss of life of an innocent person that wears a uniform.”  
 
Ms. Olurin posted clips of the interview on 
her X account, at least one of which 
garnered more than three million views. 
Chief Chell reposted the post using divisive 
and hostile language towards Ms. Olurin. 
He mocked her self -description as a 
“movement lawyer” and claimed she 
epitomized everything that “true” New 
Yorkers oppose. He described her as a 
“misinformed person”  and suggested 
Community Boards and Block Associations 
disagree with her stance. He ended the post 
with “Talk soon…”  apparently promising 
additional, and likely hostile, interaction 
with her via social media.  
 
 
 
 
                                            
64 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lLOQRG4vcT4&t=88s 
65 Elizabeth Kim, Interviewer in viral Mayor Adams segment never thought he’d show: ‘They're punking 
me’ , Gothamist , April 2, 2024, https://gothamist.com/news/interviewer-in-vira-mayor-adams-
segment-never-thought-hed-show-theyre-punking-me  
66 Mayor Adams ‘Breakfast Cl ub’ interview turns heated over slain NYPD officer: 'The far left' 
disagrees with me | Fox News; Eric Adams Interview Turns Fiery After Slain NYPD Cop Mentioned  
67 Transcript: Mayor Adams Appears on POWER 105.1 FM's "The Breakfast Club", the official website 
of the City of New York, (last accessed….)   

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 27  
 
 
 
 
 
After Chi ef Chell posted this, Ms. Olurin 
blocked him on X. In response to being 
blocked, Chief Chell posted “Just what I 
thought!” and dared Ms. Olurin to “Meet me 
in Massapequa tomorrow morning” at 
Detective Diller’s funeral, referring to him as 
“the very man you  dismissed today .” Chief 
Chell may disagree with Ms. Olurin’s 
decision to de -emphasize the killing of 
Detective Diller and highlight killings by 
police officers, but to use his official NYPD 
account to target and diminish her does not 
correct misinformation, rebut criticism of the 
Department, or further a productive dialogue 
with members of the public. It is therefore an 
inappropriate use of his official account, and 
could be interpreted as an effort to intimidate 
her for challenging the Mayor’s approach to 
policing and public safety  or to send a 
message to others who might share her 
views. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 28  
 
Deputy Commissioner Daughtry also posted 
about Ms. Olurin, writing that she had 
“odious disregard” for Detective Diller’s 
death and calling her a “dismissiv e 
individual,”
68 in a post that raises similar 
issues to Chief Chell’s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
After the interview and subsequent posts by Chief Chell and Deputy Commissioner 
Daughtry, Ms. Olurin stated that she felt like she has a target on her back and that 
she worried that she might be retaliated against by the police. She reportedly changed 
her daily routine out of fear and suffered health consequences.
69 
 
Council Member Cabán also commented on Ms. Olurin’s interview from her personal 
X account. In response to a poster’s comment that Ms. Olurin “packed Eric Adams all 
the way up with the receipts,” Council Member Cab án posted “Pheeeewwwwwww,” 
seemingly expressing relief or gratitude that someone had confronted the mayor in 
this way. Chief Chell then reposted her post and mockingly imitated Council Member 
Cabán’s words to defend the Mayor saying “Pheeeewww! Under this Mayor’s 
leadership we have saved over 700 people being shot in this city. Pheeeewww! Under 
this Mayor thousands of gun arrests protecting our most vuln erable communities. 
Pheeeww, under this Mayor crime is down while fighting ridiculous policies that your 
friends put in place and he inherited.” It is difficult to see how any of this back- and-
forth, including Council Member Cabán’s post and Chief Chell’s response, serves New 
Yorkers. To the extent that NYPD seeks to counter a narrative that the Department 
has failed to improve public safety in the City there are far better venues and 
language to credibly convey that to the public, rather than using mocking terms on X 
                                            
68 This tweet appears to have since been deleted. 
69 Angela Chapin, The Woman Who Ate Eric Adams for Breakfast, Activist Olayemi Olurin channeled 
a whole city’s frustration to grill the mayor on morning radio, the Cut, April 15, 2024, 
https://www.thecut.com/article/olayemi-olurin-eric-adams-the-breakfast-club-interview.html  

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 29  
 
directed at a Council Member. Similarly, if Council Member Cabán wanted to support 
Ms. Olurin or express a view  about NYPD or the Mayor, there are far better ways 
and venues in which to accomplish that. 
 
 
Chief Chell ended his post by saying that when he is asked by the community what 
they can do to help, he tells them “If you want change, vote the change you seek.” 
According to Chief Chell, he did not intend the statement to encourage people to vote 
or to vote in a particular way, but rather that was just encouraging the public to get 
involved and to be aware of what is happening in their communities.  In light of the 
timing of the post, it  could not have referred to a particular primary or general 
election for City Council, because no primary or general election was being held  at 
the time . However, Chief Chell’s comment concerning voting , in  the context of a 
response to the X post of a specific elected official, c ould be viewed as urging people 
to vote against that elected official  in the futur e. The post therefore raises the 
question whether such urging constitutes engagement in political activity in violation 
of the City’s conflicts of interest laws and regulations, the Hatch Act, or Department 
policy, on the theory that it is akin to a political endorsement, an activity intended to 
impact the outcome of a  future election (albeit one in which the candidates are not 
yet determined), or an opinion on the merits of a candidate for public office, 
respectively. The language used in this post raises questions whether the post  could 
be perceived as prohibited political activity. W e leave it to other entities responsible 
for enforcing violations of these laws and policies to determine whether this post is in 
fact engagement in political activity, as a matter of policy NYPD executives should 
steer clear of communications that even raise such questions.  
 
Conversation #3: Accuracy of New York Daily News Reporting 
 
On March 30, 2024, at 5:00pm, the New York Daily News published an opinion piece 
by columnist Harry Siegel which criticized NYPD for touting subway safety statistics 

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 30  
 
when there had been more murders on the subways in the first three months of the 
year than in all of 2019. 70 Siegel’s piece incorrectly stated that there had been ten 
murders, when in fact there had only been four. The New York Daily News corrected 
the error and republished the article with the accurate information by 11:00am the 
next morning. Although a significant error, particularly given the widespread public 
concern about safety  i n New York City , and safety on the subways in particular, 
NYPD did not simply correct the record, or emphasize the importance of accurate 
reporting in this area. Instead, multiple executives mocked and disparaged Mr. Siegel 
personally on social media. 
Deputy Commissioner Daughtry chimed in 
by tagging Mr. Si egel in a post stating 
“everyone has an opinion. It’s a shame that 
the Daily News chose to share yours…” He 
called Mr. S iegel a “gadfly – who should 
consider their definition of madness to: 
reading a @ha rrysiegel Siegel column 
expecting a useful takeaway.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
70 Harry Siegel, Harry Siegel: Subway cop bosses talk themselves into cuffs,  Daily News, March 30, 
2024, https://www.nydailynews.com/2024/03/30/harry-siegel-subway-cop-bosses-talk-themselves-into-
cuffs/  

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 31  
 
The next day, after the New York Daily 
News had already issued the correction, 
Chief Chell said “Oh, Harry! You had to 
make a retraction on something as simple 
as homicides (sic) stats?” He went on to say 
“The problem is that besides your flawed 
reporting is the fact that now we are calling 
you and your “latte” friends out on their 
garbage…Well get your popcorn ready, we 
have a strong platform too!” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                 
Mr. Si egel commented on Chief Chell’s 
post to say that he believed the Chief was 
“making a lot of nasty assumptions about 
motives” and offered to talk rather than to 
just post at one another on social media.                                                                                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 32  
 
Similarly, Chief Chell publicly confronted another journalist, Errol Louis, who 
suggested that instead of attacking Mr. Siegel on social media, NYPD should instead 
contact him, point out the error, and together “try to correct or reframe the 
conversation in a way that best serves the public.” Chief Chell countered that NYPD’s 
publicly confrontational approach is necessary because Mr. S iegel’s article was “a 
personal attack against the administration that Siegel has been doing for several 
years” and that it was “mean spirited” to issue the article a day after Detective Diller’s 
funeral.  
When asked, b oth Deputy Commissioner 
Daughtry and Chief Chell stated that they felt 
compelled to post, in part, because Detective 
Diller had been killed  just a few days before 
and it was a sensitive time for the 
Department. According to Chief Chell, he did 
not mean to intimidate anyone , further 
stating that in retrospect he would not have 
tagged individuals in his posts  and should 
instead have made general statements 
expressing his positions.  We agree that such 
an approach would have diffused rather tha n 
intensified the conflict, and reduced the risk 
that any individual perceived the 
communication as intimidating.   Taking a 
position on an issue, rather than an 
individual, also provides opportunity for a 
more productive public dialogue. The tragic 
death of Detective Diller is not a basis for the 
Department’s executives to attack a reporter 
personally on social media via the Department’s official channels of communication, 
over a significant error in the reporting of homicide stats . The Department’s work 
routinely involves sensitive and even heartbreaking situations, and all officers are 
entitled to respect and gratitude for their sacrifice. But  the public expects, and is 
entitled to , law enforcement officers  who act with dignity and respect in all their 
public interactions, including on social media, and who can rise above personal 
conflicts or frustration with reporters.  

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 33  
 
The day after the New York Daily News corrected its error in the City’s homicide 
statistics, the NYPD ’s NEWS  account 
thanked the public ation for their correction , 
but continued to call out the reporter , 
including by mocking his name, nicknaming 
Mr. Si egel “Harry ‘Deceitful’ Siegel.”  
According to DCPI Sheppard, name calling 
does not align with NYPD’s mission, vision, 
and values. Sheppard claimed  the comments 
were justified due to the “history” between the 
Department, the New York Daily News, and 
Mr. Si egel, and noted that Mr. Sieg el uses 
colorful language himself and writes about 
individual members of NYPD. Again, as noted 
above, the public expects and deserves a more 
productive and civil communications strategy 
from the New York City Police Department . 
Furthermore, in light of the Department’s significance, power, and authority within 
the City, the Department must maintain a consistently respectful and courteous level 
of discourse, particularly with members of the public, including journalists . That 
obligation remains unchanged regardless of how those members of the public behave. 
That is to say, Mr. Siegel’s prior statements and use of language, even if “colorful” or 
offensive cannot justify offensive statements by the Department.  
On April 6, 2024, the New York Daily News 
published another opinion piece written by 
Mr. Siegel in which he wrote about NYPD’s 
social media posts about him the prior week 
and to express his belief that questioning or 
criticizing NYPD’s leaders is not equivalent 
to being “anti -cop.”
71 Chief Chell took to 
social media again to taunt Mr. S iegel 
telling him to “write away!” and chastise d 
him to “be honest” and for port raying 
himself as a “victim” when it his “reporting 
[that] caused this.” 
                                            
71 Harry Siegel, Subway crime & touchy top cops: It’s not being anti-cop to question police brass, New 
York Daily News, April 6, 2024, https://www.nydailynews.com/2024/04/06/subway -crime-touchy-top-
cops-its-not-being-anti-cop-to-question-police-brass/  

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 34  
 
Mr. Siegel again responded to Chief Chell 
offering to speak with him privately and 
directly rather via social media, but Chief 
Chell responded publicly by questioning 
Mr. Siegel’s jo urnalistic integrity and 
stating that he should “do [his] job in good 
faith!” Chell stated: “When you do that, 
then maybe we will talk.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NYPD executives later used X again, in May, to go after other New York Daily News 
reporters, Graham Rayman and Thomas Tracy, for what they viewed as inaccurate 
reporting about NYPD’s actions in response to the Columbia University Gaza 
protests.  
In his post, Deputy Commissioner Daughtry wrote “here’s another example of a 
falsehood – this misleading…article” and then  tagged the two reporters. Chief Chell 
was more pointed and  insulting, calling Mr. Rayman irresponsible, biased, and 
motivated by a desire to get clicks. Two other posts followed later in the week again 
tagging Mr. Rayman and calling his reporting inaccura te and condemning the New 
York Daily News for failing to fact check. Again, this kind of dialogue does not prompt 
a valuable public discourse on law enforcement, accuracy in public reporting, or other 
issue of significance to New Yorkers but rather appears to be a personal spat between 
two of the senior-most NYPD officers at the time, and the press.  

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 35  
 
 
 

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 36  
 
Conversation #4: Gaza Protest Response at Columbia University 
 
Beginning on April 17, 2024, students at Columbia University established an outdoor 
encampment on the university’s campus to protest Israel’s actions in Gaza as part of 
the ongoing Israel -Hamas war. Over the ensuing weeks, the protests grew and 
negotiations between the protesters and the university about dismantling the 
encampment were not fruitful. Early on April 30, the protestors occupied a building 
on Columbia’s campus called Hamilton Hall and barricaded themselves inside. 
 
The University President wrote to the New 
York City Police Department, stating that a 
group of individuals “broke into ” Hamilton 
Hall, a university building, and have 
“vandalized University property and are 
trespassing.” The President further explained 
that there was also a continuing student 
encampment in violation of University rules 
and policies , the students were repe atedly 
directed to disperse, have been suspended, 
and therefore are trespassing on Un iversity 
property. She noted the serious safety 
concerns these circumstances posed for the 
entire community and requested NYPD’s help 
to clear individuals from Hamilton Ha ll and 
the encampments. That night NYPD entered 
the campus, breached the occupied building, 
and arrested more than 100 protestors.
72 
 
Council Member Cabán issued a statement on her personal X account, tagging both 
the Mayor and NYPD, criticizing their actio ns as “authoritarian” and “a colossal 
disgrace, a horrifying affront to democracy and free speech, and an abject failure of 
public safety.” Cabán also stated that the “power elite” ( presumably the Columbia 
University administration)–“deploys military force ” (presumably NYPD ) to “crush 
dissent. . . the way they would if they were the Russian or Iranian regime” indicating 
that NYPD was acting at the direction of entities comparable to Iran and Russia. This 
post was consistent in tone with a post earlier that day in which she described some 
of NYPD’s actions at Columbia related to press access as “fascism.”  
 
                                            
72 Minouche Shafik, Columbia Universit y, Letter to Michael Gerber, Deputy Commissioner, Legal 
Matters, April 30, 2024, Fax Transmission Cover Sheet 
  

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 37  
 
Even putting  aside whether Council Member 
Cabán’s characterization of the circumstances 
of NYPD’s approach to the Columbia campus  
was accurate, when an elected official refers to 
NYPD in extreme and inflammatory language 
such as “fascism,” “authoritarian,” or an 
“affront to democracy” they inevitably intensify 
rather than diffuse tension and mistrust  
between the Department and the communities 
it services . While the Council Member has 
every right to express strong criticism of 
NYPD, particularly from her personal social media account, there are far more 
productive and disciplined ways to express this sentiment. The language she used is 
not a starting point for any kind of meaningful dialogue between the Council Member 
and the Department, nor does it benefit the communities that  both the City Council 
and NYPD serve. 
 
Chief Chell responded to Council Member Cab án’s statement concerning NYPD’s 
response to the protests from his official NYPD account. He informed this Office that 
he was upset that she made it look like NYPD was a threat to democracy. We note 
that he did not simply seek to correct her statements concerning NYPD’s approach to 
the campus, and her comparison of NYPD and Columbia University’s conduct as akin 
to that of the Iranian and Russian regimes.  Rather, he called her statement 
“garbage,”
73 and labeled the Council Member as “a person who hates our city.” He 
then encouraged people that “if you want change, seek the change you want by getting 
involved. Then you know what to do…”  He also took the position that it was the 
protesters’ conduct, their entitlement, and their support from Council Member Cabán 
that was a “disgrace.” 
 
Chief Chell’s use of the term “garbage” and claim that Council Member Cabán “hates 
our city” and “does not represent” its people, only served to further escalate the 
hostility between the Council  M ember and the Department  that Council Member 
Cabán’s initial posts created. Furthermore, Chief Chell’s post, which was insulting 
and arguably intimidating, was directed at Council Member Cabán personally, unlike 
her post which was directed at the Department as a whole and at the Mayor.74  
                                            
73 The use of the word garbage was perhaps an intentional reference to Council Member Cab án’s 
previous use of the word garbage in an April 12, 2024 post about former Police Commissioner Caban’s 
decision to not discipline the police officers who killed Kawaski Trawick.  @tiffany_caban, TWITTER 
(X) (April. 12, 2024, 9:04 PM), https://x.com/tiffany_caban/status/1778952452408029629  
74 Council Member Cabán’s subsequent posts in connection with this incident included a post in which 
she named Chief Chell personally and referred to his “gross misconduct.”  Council Member Cab án 
wrote that “the deleted t weet is a rem inder that Chief Chell is used to just sweeping away his 
misdeeds, like when he fatally shot a man in the back, lied about it in court per the jury’s findings, 

 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 38  
 
While Chief Chell’s post does not specifically use the word vote, and like his prior post 
did not occur during a primary or election period,  his comment concerning seeking 
change, in response to a post from a specific elected official, raises similar questions 
as the post analyzed above. As previously stated, posts from official NYPD accounts 
should avoid even the possibility that they could be  perceived as engagement in 
political activity. 
Chief Chell’s post prompted a significant response. On May 2, it was reported that 
the Speaker Adams spoke with NYPD an d the Mayor, 75 and others, like Brooklyn 
Councilman Lincoln Rest ler, who referred to Chief Chell’s March 29 post where he 
stated, “If you want change, vote the change you seek” as “completely unacceptable” 
and “wildly inappropriate, unethical, and dangerous.”76 A group of 39 elected officials, 
including Congressional Representatives, the Public Advocate, and the Comptroller, 
sent Mayor Adams a letter stating that “Chief Chell’s bombastic and bullying rhetoric 
is not only a violation of democratic principles and the NYC Conflict of Interest Law, 
it is also dangerous…  He is jeopardizing the safety of Councilmember Cabán and her 
staff. This is unacceptable behavior from a public safety leader of our city.”
77 Council 
Member Cabán informed this Office that whenever Chief Chell or other NYPD 
accounts reference her directly, she receives th reats, some homophobic, as well as 
harassing statements about her racial identity.
78 
At some point on May 2, Chief Chell’s post was deleted . Chief Chell informed this 
Office that he deleted it at the request of then-Police Commissioner Caban, but at the 
time, NYPD’s press office stated that it was deleted in error. Then, later that evening, 
Chief Chell reposted the same message with the introduction “Like I said it was an 
accident…I’m back!!!!” 
                                            
and not only kept his job but got promoted. Enough. Time for consequences of his gross misconduct.”  
Tiffany Cabán (2024) ' Cabán post directed to Chief Chell regarding deleted post” [ X {fka Twitter} ] 
02/May. Available at:@tiffany_caban. 
75 N.Y.P.D. Social Media Attacks Prompt City Council to Seek Investigation - The New York Times 
76 Chris Sommerfeldt, Concerns grow over political activity as NYPD big Chell slams councilwoman in 
since-deleted tweet  New York Daily News, May 3, 2024, 
https://www.nydailynews.com/2024/05/02/concerns-grow-political-activity-nypd-chief-of-patrol-john-
chell-slams-councilwoman-caban-deleted-tweet/ 
77 Chris Sommerfeldt, NYC politicians demand Mayor Adams discipline NYPD Chief John Chell over 
‘dangerous’ tweets, New York Daily News, May 3, 2024, https:// www.nydailynews.com/2024/05/03/nyc-
politicians-demand-mayor-adams-discipline-nypd-chief-john-chell-over-dangerous-tweets-aoc-lander-
bowman/  
78 In response to requests from OIG- NYPD, Council Member Cabán’s Office provided two voice 
messages, one left during this investigative period and a second more recent message that was left 
after NYPD's aggressive social media activity had subsided. The office was unable to directly link these 
voice messages to NYPD’s posts referenced above or any posts analyzed in this report.  
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 39  
 
A. Discussion 
No aspect of the social media exchanges  discussed above  served the public . The 
exchanges do not invite true dialogue about, or resolution of, consequential issues and 
they do not seek a path to common ground among individuals who hold diverse views. 
The exchanges are not particularly informative, and to the extent that they seek to 
convey factual information to the public, that information could be conveyed far more 
effectively in a courteous, dispassionate tone. The exchanges that the Office reviewed 
served only to fuel apparent personal hostilities between individual law enforcement 
officials and other members of City government or the community.  It is this Office’s 
view that these social media exchanges diminish senior law enforcement  officers in 
the eyes of the public  and make it more difficult for law enforcement to build good 
relationships with the communities they serve. In  light of NYPD’s critical role in 
maintaining public safety in the city, these risks are significant and they far outweigh 
any benefit to the Department that these posts may convey.  
 
The social media posts of concern were relatively few in number and were created by 
a small number of NYPD executives, namely Chief Chell, Deputy Commissioner 
Daughtry, and some post s from the @ NYPDNews account. While the posts are the 
responsibility of the individuals who wrote them,  the lack of oversight over posting 
on the executive accounts and the lack of clear policies or guidance about the 
substance of posted content facilitate d the inappropriate posts that are the focus of 
this report . These lapses in compliance expose fundamental flaws in the 
Department’s oversight of its executives ’ social media use. NYPD’s internal policies 
have not been updated to reflect the requirements of the C itywide P olicy. In 
particular, the Citywide Policy refers to an internal agency review process for social 
media content—NYPD has no such review process for executive accounts. NYPD also 
does not provide training for its executives regarding the appr opriate use of social 
media and the appropriate content for social media posts.  
 
The absence of compliance with citywide policies and internal protocols has allowed 
gaps in oversight and accountability to persist, enabling the dissemination of 
inflammatory and inappropriate content. We therefore recommend, among other 
measures, that NYPD impose written policies with respect to social media usage by 
Department executives and provide training as to appropriate social media content. 
VI. Conclusion – Findings and Recommendations 
 
OIG-NYPD’s findings include:  
 
1. Certain X posts made by members of NYPD’s executive staff  on official City 
accounts were unprofessional and encouraged an unproductive public discourse . 
The posts violated Department policies related to acting with courtesy and civility.  
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 40  
 
The posts raise questions with respect to whether they may be deemed prohibited 
engagement in political activity by City employees, but DOI reaches no conclusion 
on this issue. 
2. Several of NYPD’s practices regarding social media are not in compliance with the 
Citywide Social Media Policy to which all City agencies are required to adhere. 
For example, some NYPD social media accounts are not registered with the 
Mayor’s Office of Creative Communications nor did NYPD seek or receiv e 
approval from that office for the creation of individual official social media 
accounts for executives other than the Commissioner.  
 
3. NYPD’s official use of social media policy (dated December 2, 2022) has not been 
updated to include all of the requirements of the most recent C itywide Social 
Media P olicy that was issued in June 2023. Notably , NYPD’s policy does not 
describe the roles and responsibilities of the staff members who manage the 
agency’s social media communications, the internal approval process for content, 
or how complaints about NYPD’s social media communications should be 
addressed. 
 
4. NYPD’s use of social media policy does not provide rules or guidance about what 
content and language is appropriate to be posted from an official Department 
account.  
 
5. NYPD executives with individual social media accounts operate their accounts 
without sufficient oversight and outside the supervision of the office of NYPD’s 
Deputy Commissioner of Public Information.  
 
6. Aside from a discussion during the Department ’s Basic Management Operations 
Course, NYPD does not provide formal training to NYPD executives with 
individual social media accounts regarding appropriate content for posting and 
the public impact of social media communications, although it does do so for  
Digital Communications Officers who are responsible for managing command -
level social media accounts. 
 
7. NYPD ceased to engage in social media exchanges that used discourteous 
language and targeted particular individuals in early May 2024, following public 
criticism of the posts discussed in this report and a request for a DOI investigation 
by  City Council Speaker Adrienne Adams.    
 
 
 
 
 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  January 2025 
 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 41  
 
Based on these findings, OIG -NYPD makes the following six recommendations . 
NYPD should:  
 
1. Memorialize in writing an intern al review and approval process for posts on 
executive accounts.  
2. Update all relevant Patrol Guide Procedure and Administrative Guide 
Procedure sections to align with the requirements of the Citywide Social Media 
Policy. 
 
3. Review the Citywide Social Media Po licy and ensure NYPD complies with  all 
of its requirements. 
4. Update the Department’s social media use policy to include rules and guidance 
about appropriate content and language for posting on official Department 
social media accounts. 
 
5. Assign Digital Communications Officers to all social media accounts, including 
at the executive level, to ensure that social media posts are consistent with 
citywide and department policy, and memorialize this requirement in writing. 
6. Provide training to all staff using official agency social media regarding the 
Citywide Social Media Policy, the Department’s social media policy, and best 
practices. 
 
 