more 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
CHRISTOPHER RYAN 
ACTING COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE    Release #08-2026 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE          CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 15, 2026 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
  
DOI’S OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR THE NEW YORK CITY POLICE DEPARTMENT (“OIG-NYPD”) 
ISSUES TWELFTH ANNUAL REPORT ON 26 PUBLICLY ISSUED REPORTS 
Today, the Department of Investigation’s (“DOI”) Office of the Inspector General for the New York City Police 
Department (“OIG-NYPD”) released its Twelfth Annual Report, as required by Local Law 70, which established the 
OIG-NYPD as part of DOI. This Annual Report discusses the 25 public reports and one statement of findings issued 
by OIG-NYPD between 2015 and December 31, 2025.  The Report  also discusses the status of 275  
recommendations that were issued by OIG-NYPD and responded to during that period by the New York City Police 
Department ( “NYPD”). To date, NYPD has  fully implemented 159 recommendations, or approximately 57.82 
percent; partially implemented or accepted in principle 53 recommendations, or approximately 19.27 percent; and 
rejected 47 recommendations, approximately 17.09 percent. NYPD continues to consider seven recommendations, 
or approximately 2.55 percent. As of March 1, 2026, nine recommendations, or approximately 3.27 percent, are no 
longer applicable due to a change in technology or procedure by NYPD . Two additional recommendations to the 
Civilian Complaint Review Board (“CCRB”) during a previous review cycle have been implemented. Some 
recommendations made in late 2025 are not assessed in this Report. A copy of the Report is attached to this release 
and can be found at the following link: https://www.nyc.gov/site/doi/oignypd/web/report.page  
Acting DOI Commissioner Christopher Ryan said, “The Twelfth Annual Report by DOI’s Office of the Inspector 
General for the NYPD demonstrates the array of issues examined in 25 public reports and one statement of findings 
issued over the past 11 years. This Report also catalogues the 275 recommendations issued to NYPD and the two 
recommendations issued to the CCRB , demonstrating OIG -NYPD’s consistent follow up, which has result ed in 
more than 75 percent of the recommendations being implemented, partially implemented, or accepted in principle.” 
This year’s Annual Report highlights the release in 2025 of OIG-NYPD’s two systemic investigative reports: “An 
Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media” issued in January 2025 and an “Update on NYPD’s Implementation 
of DOI’s 2023 Criminal Group Database Recommendations” issued in October 2025.  
 An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media 
This report reviewed NYPD and C itywide policies concerning both the police department and elected 
officials’ use of social media. The investigation reviewed several social media posts and conversations 
made by NYPD executives on X (formerly Twitter), between January 2022 and August 2024, using the 
handles @NYPDChiefofPatrol, @NYPDDaughtry, and @NYPDnews, as well as members of City 
Council, journalists, and members of the public to which NYPD engaged with. Following the 
investigation, OIG-NYPD determined that NYPD’s policies and practices did not fully comply with the 
Citywide Social Media Policy and NYPD did not provide sufficient oversight of posts made on executive 
accounts. 
 
OIG-NYPD issued six recommendations to NYPD that included advising NYPD to memorialize in 
writing an internal review and approval process for posts on executive accounts; review the Citywide 

2 
 
Social Media Policy and ensure NYPD is in compliance with all of it requirements; assign Digital 
Communications Officers to all social media accounts , and train all staff that use official agency social 
media as to the requirements of the Citywide Social Media Policy, the Department’s social media policy, 
and best practices. NYPD accepted the six recommendations on April 28, 2025, and OIG-NYPD 
determined that NYPD has implemented five of them. The recommendation to train all staff using official 
agency social media regarding the Citywide Social Media Policy, the Department’s social media policy, 
and best practices,  is considered partially implemented until OIG -NYPD confirms all staff, including 
executives with access to social media accounts, have been trained. 
 
 Update on NYPD's Implementation of DOI's 2023 Criminal Group Database 
In October 2025, OIG-NYPD issued an update to its 2023 report that focused on the NYPD’s Criminal 
Group Database (“CGD”) and made 17 recommendations, of which NYPD accepted 11, rejected five , 
and placed one under consideration. The October 2025 report assessed NYPD’s implementation of 
eight of the 11 accepted recommendations. OIG-NYPD found that NYPD needed to revise its Impact 
and Use Policy (“IUP”) for the CGD; more clearly define the activation, renewal, and deactivation 
processes of CGD; explain the nature and extent of the evidence required to satisfy the entry criteria; 
and specify, by name, the law enforcement and two additional external entities with which NYPD could 
share information about the individuals included in the CGD. In its October 2025 report, OIG -NYPD 
also issued 13 new recommendati ons focused on training personnel on the requirements of the IUP, 
updating the IUP and Chief of Detective’s Memo, conducting quarterly internal reviews and audits of 
the database to ensure accuracy; and improving data collection and publication. According to NYPD’s 
90-day response, issued on January 13, 2026, the Department accepted all 13 recommendations. 
These recommendations have been accepted in principle preliminarily until a full implementation status 
can be assessed during the 2026 annual report cycle.
 
In addition to its investigations, OIG -NYPD conducted outreach in 2025 that included regular attendance at  
NYPD CompStat and conducting quarterly presentations for newly assigned Internal Affairs staff at NYPD’s Internal 
Investigation Course at the Police Academy.   
 
The Twelfth Annual Report was prepared by Deputy Inspector General Lesley Bedeau in DOI’s Office of the 
Inspector General for the NYPD  and supervised by Acting Inspector General Christina Soto and Special Counsel 
to the Inspector General Maria Kostel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DOI is one of the oldest law-enforcement agencies in the country and New York City’s corruption watchdog. Investigations may involve any agency, 
officer, elected official or employee of the City, as well as those who do business with or receive benefits from the City. DOI’s strategy attacks corruption 
comprehensively through systemic investigations that lead to high-impact arrests, preventive internal controls and operational reforms that improve the 
way the City runs. 
 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
Table of Contents  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD  
1 
F 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2026 OIG-NYPD 
Twelfth 
Annual Report  
 
Acting Commissioner Christopher Ryan 
Acting Inspector General Christina Soto 
 
April 2026 
New York City Department of Investigation 
 
Office of Inspector General for the 
New York City Police Department 
Table of Contents  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD  
2 
Table of Contents  
Introduction 4 
Background 5 
OIG-NYPD Twelfth Annual Report 7 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media (January 2025) 7 
Recommendation Implementation Statuses as of December 31, 2025 8 
Update on NYPD’s Implementation of DOI’s 2023 Criminal Group Database 
Recommendations (October 2025) 10 
Outreach And Engagement 11 
Complaints and Investigations by the Numbers 11 
Featured OIG-NYPD Investigations, Recommendations, and Statuses 11 
I. Using Data from Lawsuits and Legal Claims Involving NYPD to Improve Policing 
(2015)                                                        12 
II. When Undocumented Immigrants are Crime Victims: An Assessment of NYPD’s 
Handling of U Visa Certification Requests (2017) 12 
III. Complaints of Biased Policing in New York City: An Assessment of NYPD’s 
Investigations, Policies, and Training (2019) 13 
IV. An Assessment of NYPD’s Response to the POST Act (2022) 14 
V. An Investigation into NYPD’s Criminal Group Database (2023) 15 
VI. An Assessment of NYPD’s Compliance with the POST Act (2023) 16 
VII. An Assessment of NYPD’s Compliance with the POST Act (2024) 17 
Appendix: Recommendation Status of Reports Issued January 2015-December 2025 18 
2015 18 
Observations on Accountability and Transparency in Ten NYPD Chokehold Cases 18 
Using Data from Lawsuits and Legal Claims Involving NYPD to Improve Policing 18 
Body-Worn Cameras in NYC: Assessment of NYPD’s Pilot Program and Recommendations 
to Promote Accountability 19 
Police Use of Force in New York City: Findings and Recommendations on NYPD’s Policies 
and Practices 21 
2016 24 
An Analysis of Quality-Of-Life Summonses, Quality-Of-Life Misdemeanor Arrests, and 
Felony Crimes in New York City, 2010-2015 24 
An Investigation of NYPD’s Compliance with Rules Governing Investigations of Political 
Activity 25 
2017 27 
Table of Contents  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD  
3 
Putting Training into Practice: A Review of NYPD’s Approach to Handling Interactions with 
People in Mental Crisis 27 
Addressing Inefficiencies in NYPD’s Handling of Complaints: An Investigation of the 
“Outside Guidelines” Complaint Process 28 
When Undocumented Immigrants are Crime Victims: An Assessment of NYPD’s Handling 
of U Visa Certification Requests 29 
Review of NYPD’s Implementation of Patrol Guide Procedures Concerning Transgender 
and Gender Non-Conforming People 30 
2018 32 
An Investigation of NYPD’s New Force Reporting System 32 
An Investigation of NYPD’s Special Victims Division – Adult Sex Crimes 35 
Ongoing Examination of Litigation Data Involving NYPD 37 
2019 39 
2019 Assessment of Litigation Data Involving NYPD 39 
Complaints of Biased Policing in New York City: An Assessment of NYPD’s Investigations, 
Policies, and Training 40 
An Investigation of NYPD’s Officer Wellness and Safety Services 44 
2021 46 
Sharing Police Body Worn Camera Footage in New York City 46 
2022 47 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Response to the POST Act 47 
2023 50 
An Investigation into NYPD’s Criminal Group Database (2023) 50 
Overtime Under Review: NYPD Overtime and the Increased Risk of Negative Policing 
Outcomes 52 
Statement of Findings Regarding NYPD’s Technical Assistance and Response Unit and the 
Revised Handschu Guidelines 53 
2024 55 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Compliance with the POST Act 55 
A Review of NYPD’s Community Response Team 57 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Compliance with the POST Act 58 
2025 60 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media 60 
Update on NYPD’s Implementation of DOI’s 2023 Criminal Group Database 
Recommendations 60 
 
Introduction     Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
4 
Introduction  
The mission of the Office of the Inspector General for the New York City Police Department 
(“OIG-NYPD” or “OIG” ) is to enhance the effectiveness of the New York City Police 
Department (“NYPD” or “the Department”), increase public safety, protect civil liberties and 
civil rights, and increase the public’s confidence in NYPD. This report summarizes OIG -
NYPD’s work over the past year and continues to highlight the breadth, scope, and impact of 
OIG-NYPD’s reports that reflect the Office’s continued commitment to independent oversight 
and promotes police accountability and transparency within the NYPD.  
OIG-NYPD is mandated under Section 803(c)(1) of the New York City Charter (“Charter”) to 
“investigate, review, study, audit, and make recommendations relating to the operation, 
policies, programs, and practices, including ongoing partnerships with other law 
enforcement agencies of the new york city police department with the goal of enhancing the 
effectiveness of the department, increasing public safety, protecting civil liberties and civil 
rights, and increasing the public’s confidence in the police force,  thus building stronger 
police-community relations.”
1 
This Annual Report, issued pursuant to section 803(e)(3) of the Charter , summarizes the 
Office’s work as it relates to section 803 (c)(1) by April 1 of each year  and summarizes the 
Office’s work including the following:  
(a) a description of all significant findings from the investigations, reviews, studies, and audits 
conducted in the preceding year; 
 (b) a description of the recommendations for corrective action made in the preceding year;  
(c) an identification of each recommendation described in previous annual reports on which 
corrective action has not been implemented or completed; and. 
(d) the number of open investigations, reviews, studies, or audits that have been open, as of 
the close of the preceding calendar year, for the following periods:  
1) six months up to and including one year,  
2) more than one year up to and including two years,  
3) more than two years up to and including three years, and  
4) more than three years.  
(e) the subject matter of each investigation, review, study, or audit relating to the police 
department that has been open, as of the close of the preceding calendar year, for more than 
three years;  
(f) the number of incidents where the police department did not give access to information 
requested by the commissioner in the performance of the duties described in paragraph 1 of 
subdivision c of this section, in (1) closed investigations and (2) investigations that 
have been open for more than three years; and  
 
1 N.Y.C. Charter ch. 34, § 803 (2025), 
https://codelibrary.amlegal.com/codes/newyorkcity/latest/NYCcharter/0 -0-0-2404 
Introduction     Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
5 
(g) the number and subject of matters of investigations, reviews, studies and audits 
relating to the police department that were closed without issuing a report during the 
preceding calendar year. 
 
Online Report Availability  
Each of the reports discussed in OIG-NYPD’s 2026 Annual Report are available online on the 
Department of Investigation’s Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD website.  
 
All OIG-NYPD reports are available here. 
Background 
This year’s Annual Report highlights the release of OIG -NYPD’s two systemic investigative 
reports, “An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media” and an “Update on NYPD’s 
Implementation of DOI’s 2023 Criminal Group Database Recommendations” released in 
January and October 2025 , respectively, which include  a combined 19 recommendations  
aimed at improving NYPD. Summaries of these reports, along with an assessment of the 
implementation status of six recommendations related to NYPD’s use of social media , are 
provided below.
2  
This report also identifies NYPD’s implementation of 159 recommendations, including sub-
recommendations, issued across 25 OIG -NYPD reports and one  statement of findings 
released between 2015  and 2025, for a total of 26 systemic reports .3 This includes 2 1 
recommendations, or approximately 13.21% of implemented recommendations, that were 
implemented during this report’s review cycle. 
The implementation statuses of the OIG -NYPD’s recommendations are classified into the 
following categories: Implemented (I), Partially Implemented (PI),  Accepted in Principle 
(AIP), Under Consideration (UC), Rejected (R) or No Longer Applicable (NLA).4   Only reports 
 
2 This report does not include an assessment of the 13 recommendations made in the “Update on NYPD’s 
Implementation of DOI’s 2023 Criminal Group Database Recommendations”  report, for which the 
Department’s 90-day response was received on January 13, 2026, accepting the 13 recommendations.  These 
13 recommendations  have been accepted in principle, and their  implementation statuses will be assessed 
within the Office’s 2027 Thirteenth Annual Report. 
 
3 Overall, OIG -NYPD has issued 277 recommendations between 2015 -2025, with two of these 
recommendations issued to the CCRB in the Complaints of Biased Policing in New York City report.  Of the 275 
recommendations issued to the NYPD , 159 have been implemented, 2 7 have been partially implemented, 26  
have been accepted in principle, 7 are under consideration, 47 have been rejected , and 9 are no longer 
applicable.  
 
4 Implemented or Partially Implemented (I or PI): NYPD has accepted and implemented these 
recommendations completely or in part.  Accepted in Principle (AIP): NYPD has agreed with the general intent 
of these recommendations but has not yet implemented them. Under Consideration (UC): NYPD has not yet 
decided whether to adopt or reject these recommendations. Rejected (R): NYPD does not agree with the 
recommendations and will not implement them. No Longer Applicable (NLA): Due to a change in technology or 
procedure by NYPD, these recommendations are no longer relevant.  
Introduction     Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
6 
with recommendations that have changed in status to implemented are discussed within the 
body of this report. The appendix details the status of recommendations from all 26 systemic 
reports issued to date.   
As depicted in the table below, NYPD has implemented approximately 57.82% of OIG-NYPD 
recommendations, partially implemented  approximately 9.82%, and accepted in principle 
approximately 9 .45% of these recommendations .  While approximately 2.55% are under 
consideration and approximately 17.09% have been rejected , the Office is committed to 
working with the Department to  find ways to implement recommendations that remain 
relevant. As of March 1, 2026, approximately 3.27% of the recommendations issued to NYPD 
are no longer applicable.  
 
 
 
57.82%
9.82%
9.45%
2.55%
17.09%
3.27%
Status of Recommendations Applicable to NYPD
Implemented Partially Implemented Accepted in Principle
Under Consideration Rejected No Longer Applicable
Featured OIG-NYPD Investigations, Recommendations and Statuses    Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
7 
OIG-NYPD Twelfth Annual Report 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media (January 2025) 
In January 2025, OIG-NYPD released, “An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media,” which 
reviewed NYPD and citywide policies concerning both the police department and elected 
officials’ use of social media.  The investigation review ed several social media posts and 
conversations made by NYPD executives on X (formerly Twitter), between January 2022 and 
August 2024, using the handles  @NYPDChiefofPatrol, @NYPDDaughtry, and @NYPDnews , 
as well as members of City Council, journalists , and members of the public with whom the  
NYPD engaged. 
Following the investigation, OIG -NYPD determined that NYPD’s policies and practices did  
not fully comply with the Citywide Social Media Policy and NYPD did not provide sufficient 
oversight of posts made on executive accounts.  
Specifically, OIG-NYPD made the following findings: 
1. Certain X posts  by NYPD’s executive staff on official City acc ounts were unprofessional 
and fostered unproductive public discourse, violating Department policies on being 
courteous and civil . The violations raise d the question with respect to whether the  
discourse may be deemed prohibited engagement in political activity by City employees; 
however, DOI did not reach a conclusion on this matter. 
2. Several of NYPD’s practices regarding social media were  not in compliance with the 
Citywide Social Media Policy which is applicable to all City agencies. 
3. NYPD’s official use of social media policy (dated December 2, 2022) had not been updated 
to include all the requirements of the most recent Citywide Social Media Policy that was 
issued in June 2023. Also, NYPD’s use of social media policy d id not provide guidelines 
on what content and language is appropriate  for posts from  an official Department 
account. 
4. NYPD executives managed their individual social media accounts with limited oversight 
and without supervision from the O ffice of NYPD’s Deputy Commissioner of Public 
Information.  
5. NYPD did not offer formal training to executives with individual social media accounts  
on appropriate content for  social media post s or the potential public impact of social 
media communications.  
 Based on those findings, OIG-NYPD made the following six recommendations:  
1. Memorialize in writing an internal review and approval process for posts on executive 
accounts.  
2. Update all relevant Patrol Guide Procedure and Administrative Guide Procedure sections 
to align with the requirements of the Citywide Social Media Policy. 
Featured OIG-NYPD Investigations, Recommendations and Statuses    Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
8 
3. Review the Citywide Social Media Policy and ensure NYPD  complies with all of its 
requirements. 
4. Update the Department’s social media use policy to include rules and guidance about 
appropriate content and language for posting on official Department social media 
accounts. 
5. Assign Digital Communications Officers to all social media accounts, including at the 
executive level, to ensure that social media posts are consistent with c itywide and 
department policy, and memorialize this requirement in writing. 
6. Provide training to all staff using official social media regarding the Citywide Social Media 
Policy, the Department’s social media policy, and best practices. 
In NYPD’s 90-day response to the report, issued on April 28, 2025, the Department accepted 
the six recommendations and expressed appreciation to the Office for its review of the 
policies, practices, and procedures governing the Department’s use of social media.  Below 
is a list of each recommendation , along with the implementation status of each 
recommendation. A chart illustrating NYPD’s implementation status of each 
recommendation is also provided below. 
The full report is available here .  
Recommendation Implementation Statuses as of December 31, 
2025 
# Recommendation OIG-NYPD Assessment 
1 Memorialize in writing an 
internal review and 
approval process for posts 
on executive accounts. 
The Department updated Administrative Guide 
Procedures 304- 19 “Department Social Media 
Accounts and Policy” which became effective May 21, 
2025, and requires that the Deputy Commissioner, 
Public Information
, review and approve or 
disapprove all requests for social media accounts, as 
well as provide oversight for all content 
disseminated via Department social media.  
Therefore, this recommendation is considered  
implemented. 
2 Update all relevant Patrol 
Guide Procedure and 
Administrative Guide 
Procedure sections to align 
with the requirements of the 
The Department updated Administrative Guide 
Procedures 304- 19 “Department Social Media 
Accounts and Policy ,” which became  effective May 
21, 2025, which provides, among other things , that 
“All postings on social media sites should align with 
the Department’s mission and values (including A.G. 
Featured OIG-NYPD Investigations, Recommendations and Statuses    Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
9 
# Recommendation OIG-NYPD Assessment 
Citywide Social Media 
Policy. 
304-06 Prohibited Conduct), use appropriate 
language, and demonstrate professionalism . 
Therefore, this recommendation is considered 
implemented. 
3 Review the Citywide Social 
Media Policy and ensure 
NYPD complies with all of its 
requirements 
After review of Citywide Social Media Policy , NYPD 
updated its policy and establish ed clear roles, 
responsibilities, and training requirements for social 
media use
; required official approval and 
registration of social media accounts through a 
centralized office; and s et security standards and 
outline procedures for responding to cyberattacks 
and posts that violate the Citywide Social Media 
Policy. 
Therefore, this recommendation is 
considered implemented. 
4 Update the Department’s 
social media use policy to 
include rules and guidance 
about appropriate content 
and language for posting on 
official Department social 
media accounts. 
Administrative Guide Procedure No. 304 -19, 
"Departmental Social Media Accounts and Policy ," 
became effective May 21, 2025, and was updated to 
provide language on appropriate content and 
language, including that all postings on social media 
sites should align with the Department’s mission and 
values, use appropriate language, and demonstrate 
professionalism. The procedure also provides a list 
of prohibited conduct in regard to  social media 
usage. 
Therefore, this recommendation is 
considered implemented. 
5 Assign Digital 
Communications Officers to 
all social media accounts, 
including at the executive 
level, to ensure that social 
media posts are consistent 
with citywide and 
department policy, and 
memorialize this 
requirement in writing. 
Each official Department social media account, 
including those at the executive level, now has an 
assigned Digital Communications Officer (“DCO”).  
All DCOs are required to adhere to the policies and 
procedures outlined in 
Administrative Guide 
Procedure No. 304 -19, "Departmental Social Media 
Accounts and Policy", and Administrative Guide 
Procedure No. 303- 17, “Digital Communications 
Officer” effective February 2, 2026.  Therefore, this 
recommendation is considered implemented. 
Featured OIG-NYPD Investigations, Recommendations and Statuses    Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
10 
# Recommendation OIG-NYPD Assessment 
6 Provide training to all staff 
using official agency social 
media regarding the 
Citywide Social Media 
Policy, the Department’s 
social media policy, and best 
practices. 
The Office of the Deputy Commissioner, Public 
Information (DCPI), revised its training program for 
Digital Communications Officers (DCOs), including 
those managing executive accounts , and provided 
copies of the training and roll out schedule to OIG -
NYPD.  The Office considers this recommendation  
partially implemented until OIG -NYPD confirm s all 
staff, including executives 
with access to social 
media accounts, have been trained.   
Update on NYPD’s Implementation of DOI’s 2023 Criminal Group 
Database Recommendations (October 2025) 
In April 2023, the Office released its report, “An Investigation into NYPD’s Criminal Group 
Database,” which concluded that NYPD failed to provide adequate guidance to officers on the 
criteria for adding individuals to the database; maintained  insufficient documentation to 
justify the inclusion and renewal of entries into the database;  lacked any process for 
notifying parents that their minor children were entered in to the database; and lacked 
documentation of key policies and practices related to the use of the database.  
 
Based on these findings, OIG-NYPD issued 17 recommendations, of which NYPD accepted 11, 
rejected five, and placed one  under consideration. In the October 2025 report, this Office  
assessed NYPD’s implementation of eight of the 11 accepted recommendations.   
This Office found that NYPD needed to revise its Impact and Use Policy for the CGD ; more 
clearly define the activation, renewal, and deactivation processes of CGD;  explain the nature 
and extent of the evidence required to satisfy the entry criteria; and specify, by name, the 
law enforcement and two  additional external entities with wh ich NYPD could share 
information about the individuals included in the CGD.  
Following its assessment, OIG -NYPD issued 13 new recommendations focused on training 
personnel on the requirements of the IUP, updating the IUP and Chief of Detective’s Memo, 
conducting quarterly internal reviews and audits of the database to ensure accuracy; and 
improving data collection and publication. According to NYPD’s 90-day response, issued on 
January 13, 2026, the Department accepted all 13 recommendations.  Accordingly , these 
recommendations have been accepted in principle preliminarily until a full implementation 
status can be assessed during the 2027 annual report.  
A full copy of the report is available here. 
Featured OIG-NYPD Investigations, Recommendations and Statuses    Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
11 
Outreach And Engagement 
In 2025, OIG-NYPD’s outreach included attendance at NYPD’s CompStat, CCRB’s public board 
meetings and public-safety panels including John Jay’s NYC at the Crossroads: Charting a Safe 
and Just Path Forward. In addition, OIG-NYPD presented quarterly to newly assigned staff at 
NYPD’s Internal Affairs as part of NYPD’s Internal Investigation Course at the Police 
Academy. 
To request a meeting with OIG -NYPD or to invite OIG -NYPD to an event, please contact the 
Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD at outreachoignypd@doi.nyc.gov.  
Complaints and Investigations by the Numbers 
In addition to conducting outreach , OIG-NYPD receives information from members of the 
public, elected officials, criminal justice stakeholders, as well as from members of the NYPD 
regarding concerns on the operations, policies, procedures, and practices of the NYPD.   
Pursuant to § 803(d)(3) of the New York City Charter, as of December 31, 2025, OIG -NYPD 
reports the following:  
1. Five (5) investigations have been opened for six months up to and including one 
year,  
2. Zero (0)  investigations have been opened for more than one year up to an d 
including two years;  
3.  Zero (0)  investigations have been opened for more than two years up to and 
including three years; and  
4.  Zero (0) investigations have been opened for more than three years.   
These figures include both systemic reviews and individual complaints received from 
members of the public.5  
Featured OIG-NYPD Investigations, 
Recommendations, and Statuses 
This next section features reports with recommendations that have changed status  from 
partially implemented, accepted in principle, under consideration or rejected , to fully 
implemented during the 2025 annual review cycle.6   
 
5 The Department has provided OIG -NYPD with access to all requested information regarding these 
investigations.  
 
6 Recommendation status updates for reports with recommendations that remain partially implemented, 
accepted in principle, under consideration, rejected, and no longer applicable appear in the appendix. 
 
Featured OIG-NYPD Investigations, Recommendations and Statuses    Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
12 
I. Using Data from Lawsuits and Legal Claims Involving NYPD 
to Improve Policing (2015) 
In 2015, OIG-NYPD released a report examining how NYPD could improve its collection and 
use of police litigation data to enhance officer performance, identify trends, and support 
meaningful process improvements. The r eport recommended that NYPD expand the scope 
of data it tracks to include details such as  the nature of filed  claims, core allegations, 
information about the subject police officer, the location of the alleged incident, and the 
plaintiff’s home address. It also recommended that NYPD establish an interagency task force 
with the Law Department and the Comptroller’s Office to coordinate the collection and 
sharing of litigation data and to  provide the public with details regarding  NYPD’s Early 
Intervention System. OIG-NYPD issued three primary recommendations (Recommendations 
1–3), along with three sub-recommendations (1.1–1.3), for a total of six aimed at guiding the 
New York City Police Department in improving its use of litigation data going forward. Of the 
six recommendations , three recommendations were implemented, one recommendation  
was partially implemented, one recommendation was  under consideration and one  
recommendation was rejected.
7  
In 2025, recommendation 3 changed status from partially implemented to fully implemented 
following NYPD’s creation of a publicly available website that provides details about their 
Early Intervention System . As such, OIG -NYPD now considers recommendation 3 fully 
implemented.  
NYPD’s Early Intervention System website can be access here.  
II. When Undocumented Immigrants are Crime Victims: An 
Assessment of NYPD’s Handling of U Visa Certification 
Requests (2017) 
This Report examined NYPD’s role in and procedures for the U nonimmigrant status visa (“U 
visa”) certification process. A U visa is provided to undocumented victims of certain 
qualifying crimes who assist officials in the investigation and prosecution of those crimes. A 
certification of cooperation from a local law enforcement agency is required to obtain a U 
visa. The Report identified concerns  regarding the Department’s reliance on criminal 
background checks to deny certification requests , its practice of referring certification 
requests to other agencies , and the lack of standards for certification eligibility . OIG-NYPD 
issued ten recommendations to the Department designed to establish standardized practices 
for U visa certification, enhance transparency, improve public access to information, and 
expand training for officers who frequently interact with immigrant communities within the 
New York City Police Department.  Of the ten recommendations, three recommendations 
 
7 Recommendations 1 and 1.3 remain under consideration. 
Featured OIG-NYPD Investigations, Recommendations and Statuses    Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
13 
were fully implemented, two recommendations were partially implemented, and  five 
recommendations were rejected.  
In 2025,  recommendation 3 was changed from partially implemented to implemented 
following the memorialization of  NYPD’s policy regarding uncooperative U Visa applicants 
in Patrol Guide Procedure 207 -37. Additionally, recommendation 10 was reclassified from 
partially implemented to implemented after NYPD’s updated Organizational Guide No. 160-
01 to include an explanation of the Domestic Violence U- Visa review and intake process for 
certification requests. Accordingly, OIG-NYPD now considers recommendations 3 and 10 to 
be fully implemented. 
A full copy of the report can be accessed here. 
III. Complaints of Biased Policing in New York City: An 
Assessment of NYPD’s Investigations, Policies, and Training 
(2019) 
In New York City, “Bias -Based Profiling,” otherwise known as biased policing, is defined in 
Section 14-151 of the New York City Administrative Code as any discriminatory action by 
law enforcement that is motivated by a person’s actual or perceived status protected by law 
(for example, race, gender, or sexual orientation).8 In 2013, a federal judge in Floyd v. City of 
New York 9 held that NYPD’s “stop, question, and frisk”  policies and practices violated the 
Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments, finding that they resulted in the disproportionate and 
discriminatory stopping of hundreds of thousands of Black and Latino people. Among other 
remedies, the court r equired NYPD to track and investigate civilian complaints related to 
racial profiling and other allegations of bias. 
In 2019, d uring our investigation into NYPD’s  handling of biased -based complaints, OIG -
NYPD found that between 2014 and 2018 — when NYPD began tracking and investigating  
these complaints—t here were significant deficiencies in how  these cases were tracked and 
investigated. As a result, OIG-NYPD issued 23 recommendations to the Department aimed at 
improving NYPD’s investigation into biased policing, improving public access to information 
on how to file a biased policing complaint , and creating clear protocols for information 
sharing between NYPD, Civilian Complaint Review Board (“CCRB”), and New York City 
Commission on Human Rights (“ CCHR”).10 Of the 23 recommendations, 11  
recommendations were accepted and implemented, two recommendations were partially 
 
8 See https://codelibrary.amlegal.com/codes/newyorkcity/latest/NYCadmin/0 -0-0-129754 
 
9 See https://law.justia.com/cases/federal/appellate-courts/ca2/13-3088/13-3088-2014-10-31.html  
 
10 CCHR advised OIG-NYPD that the recommendation for the NYPD to establish information sharing protocols 
or access to BWC footage with their agency is not applicable as they do not operate in the same manner as 
CCRB. 
 
Featured OIG-NYPD Investigations, Recommendations and Statuses    Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
14 
implemented, three recommendations were accepted in principle, one recommendation was 
under consideration and six recommendations were rejected. 
During this  past annual review cycle,  recommendation 18 changed from partially 
implemented to fully implemented following NYPD ’s placement of  information regarding 
how to file a biased -based policing complaint at: 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/nypd/about/department-policy/racial-bias-based-
profiling.page. Additionally, on December 5, 2023, t he NYPD and CCRB entered a  
Memorandum of Understanding  (“MOU”) which put the necessary protocols in place for 
appropriate information sharing between the two agencies .  On March 5, 2024, CCRB 
assessed NYPD’s compliance with the MOU and indicated to OIG-NYPD that recommendation 
23 was fully implemented. As such, OIG -NYPD considers recommendations 18 and 23 fully 
implemented. Recommendation 16 is no longer applicable.  
 A full copy of the Report can be accessed here. 
IV. An Assessment of NYPD’s Response to the POST Act (2022) 
On July 15, 2020, former- Mayor Bill de Blasio signed the Public Oversight of Surveillance 
Technology (“POST”) Act into law , requiring NYPD to publicly disclose information 
concerning its use of surveillance technology and to develop policies surrounding the 
technology’s use and impact on the public. The POST Act defines surveillance technology as 
“equipment, software, or systems capable of, used or designed for, collecting, retaining, 
processing, or sharing audio, video, location, thermal, biometric, or similar information, that 
is operated by or at the direction of [NYPD].” 11 For each qualifying technology, NYPD must 
publish an Impact and Use Policy (“IUP”) that reports on ten areas.  
In this Office’s 2022 report, OIG -NYPD issued 15 recommendations  to NYPD , including 
directing the Department to issue an IUP for each individual technology  and assess any  
disparate impacts on protected groups , revis e the sections  of IUPS  regarding health and 
Safety, and support  the Office ’s annual audit by providing quarterly updates.  Of the 15 
recommendations, six recommendations  were accepted and  implemented, three 
recommendations were partially implemented, two recommendations were accepted in 
principle, one recommendation remained under consideration and three recommendations 
were rejected.   
In February 2026,  the Department updated all Impact and Use Policies related to 
surveillance technologies, which had a significant impact on the implementation status of 
recommendations within the POST Act. Recommendations 1, 5, and 12 moved from rejected 
to implemented with the issuance of new IUPs, updates to health and safety reporting and 
written guidelines surrounding modification of probe images. R ecommendations 4 and 11 
which had been accepted in principle became fully implemented following updates to the 
IUPs regarding disparate impacts and upon NYPD providing OIG -NYPD with listings of 
 
11 N.Y.C. Local Law No. 65 (2020) codified at N.Y.C ADMIN. CODE § 14-188 and N.YC. CHARTER § 803[c-1] 
Featured OIG-NYPD Investigations, Recommendations and Statuses    Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
15 
technologies acquired by the Department and their functionalities.  R ecommendations 2, 3 
and 8 moved from rejected to partially implemented  as updates to the IUPs addressed 
portions within each recommendation, and recommendations 7 and 13 moved from rejected 
to accepted in principle as NYPD has accepted these recommendations and continues to 
work towards the implementation of them. R ecommendation 14 changed from under 
consideration to fully implemented following the receipt of semiannual updates provided by 
NYPD to this Office indicating that there had not been any newly acquired technology by the 
Department. Although these reports were not  received on a quarterly basis, OIG -NYPD 
considers recommendation 14 fully implemented, as semiannual reporting is consistent with 
the requirements of the POST Act. Recommendation 6 remains rejected.  
A full copy of the Report can be accessed here. 
V. An Investigation into NYPD’s Criminal Group Database 
(2023) 
In 2017, advocacy groups and media outlets revealed that the NYPD created and used a 
Criminal Group Database ( “CGD”) to support the investigative and public safety efforts of 
officers.  The CGD records provided details about alleged gang members and intelligence 
relating to criminal groups and their activity.  Uniformed members of service were provided 
access to the database information through the Domain Awareness System ’s (DAS) search 
function.  
The use of the CGD generated significant public concern, with political leaders, advocates, 
and community members seeking  information on several key issues : (1) the criteria for 
inclusion in and removal from the CGD ; (2) the training and supervision of officers 
authorized to determine whether individuals should be included; (3) whether/how 
individuals can find out if they are in the database; (4) whether/how individuals can seek 
removal; (5) what due process, civil liberty, and/or privacy protections are in place to avoid 
the misclassification of individuals; and (6) how to prevent misuse of the data. 
This Office’s 2023 report included , among other findings, that NYPD did not provide 
adequate guidance to officers on the criteria for adding an individual’s name to the database, 
the methods to add individuals were deficient, the process was insufficiently documented in 
policy or in supporting documentation, and parents of minors were not being notified when 
their children were added to the database.  The original CGD report included 17 
recommendations, of which NYPD had accepted 11 . By 2025,  one recommendation was 
implemented, seven were partially implemented, three remained accepted in principle, and 
six were rejected.  
In OIG-NYPD’s follow-up investigation, “An Update on NYPD’s Implementation of DOI’s 2023 
Criminal Group Database,” released in October 2025,  OIG-NYPD assessed eight of the 11 
accepted recommendations. A review of those recommendations found that the Department 
made significant changes to the activation, deactivation, renewal process and requirements, 
as well as provided members of service with updated written guidance in the updated IUP 
Featured OIG-NYPD Investigations, Recommendations and Statuses    Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
16 
and a Chief of Detectives Memorandum  issued on October 13, 2023, and October 11, 2023, 
respectively. 
As a result, OIG-NYPD now considers recommendations 2, 4-6, 14 and 15 of the 2023 report 
fully implemented . As noted earlier , OIG -NYPD issued 13 new recommendations to the 
Department as part of the 2025 report aimed at ensuring NYPD’s compliance with internal 
policies.  
A full copy of the Report can be accessed here. 
VI. An Assessment of NYPD’s Compliance with the POST Act 
(2023) 
In OIG-NYPD’s second annual POST Act report issued in 2023, the Office examined  IUPs for 
five surveillance technologies introduced by NYPD during the 2023 calendar year.  Those  
technologies were Digidog, a remotely operated  robot; the Knightscope K5 Autonomous 
Security Robot (“K5”);  StarChase GPS tracking technology (“StarChase”); IDEMIA Mobile 
Biometric Check application (“IDEMIA”); and an augmented reality smartphone application 
referred to as “the AR application”.  
OIG-NYPD found that NYPD did not issue new IUPs when  deploying any of these five 
surveillance technologies and instead issued addenda to existing IUPs to address the  use of 
K5, StarChase, IDEMIA, and the AR application. While K5, StarChase, IDEMIA, and the AR 
application were appropriately identified as enhancements to , or new uses of , existing 
surveillance technologies  their addenda did not meet all the requirements of the POST Act.  
Additionally, NYPD addressed Digidog within an existing IUP rather than issuing a separate 
IUP as required.12  
OIG-NYPD issued seven recommendations to the Department aimed at improving NYPD’s 
transparency, compliance, and oversight of surveillance technologies under the POST Act. 
The recommendations called for issuing and updating IUPs to fully disclose how specific 
technologies operate, including their rules, data practices, and potential health and safety 
impacts. The recommendations also emphasized  clearer policy organization by requiring 
that only closely related technologies be grouped together and that existing grouped policies 
be reviewed and corrected where  necessary. Of the seven r ecommendations, one was 
partially implemented, four were accepted in principle, and two were rejected. 
In May of 2025, the City Council passed Local Law 56 of 2025, amending the original language 
of the POST Act and mandating that NYPD publish IUPs for all new and distinct surveillance 
 
12 In 2022, OIG -NYPD maintained that Digidog was a surveillance technology with distinct capabilities from 
situational awareness cameras and required a separate IUP.  Based on OIG’s analysis and the Department’s 
reassessment of all IUPs following the 2025 amendments to the POST Act, Digidog is in the IUP titled, “Remote 
Controlled Robots: Tactical.” 
Featured OIG-NYPD Investigations, Recommendations and Statuses    Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
17 
technologies. In complying with the amended POST Act,  recommendations 1, 2, 4, 5 and 7 
are now considered fully implemented. 
 A full copy of the Report can be accessed here. 
VII. An Assessment of NYPD’s Compliance with the POST Act 
(2024) 
The Public Oversight of Surveillance Technology (“POST”) Act, passed in June 2020, requires 
NYPD to publicly disclose information concerning its use of surveillance technologies, and 
its policies with respect to those technologies through Impact and Use Policies (“IUPs”). The 
law further requires OIG-NYPD to prepare annual audits of NYPD’s IUPs.  
In OIG-NYPD’s third annual report related to the Department’s compliance with the POST 
Act, the Office reviewed NYPD’s use of unmanned aircraft systems (“UAS”), commonly 
referred to as drones, and the IUPs related to the surveillance technology.  
OIG-NYPD’s review found that while the Thermographic Cameras IUP was sufficient with 
respect to drone technology, NYPD’s UAS IUP did not sufficiently disclose all the information 
required by the POST Act. Specifically, the UAS IUP did not describe the full capabilities of 
the Department’s drone fleet or provide a complete and accurate account  of NYPD UAS 
operations in practice.  
OIG-NYPD made ten recommendations that focused on increasing transparency regarding 
the capabilities of drone technology and the policies and procedures regulating its use by the 
Department. On March 20, 2025, NYPD provided its 90-day response letter. The Department 
accepted all ten recommendations. During this review cycle, OIG -NYPD reviewed the 
updates to the Impact and Use Policies related to UAS and as a result, recommendations 3-6, 
and 8-10 moved from accepted in principle to fully implemented. 
A full copy of the Report can be accessed here.  
 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
18 
Appendix: Recommendation Status of Reports 
Issued January 2015-December 2025  
2015 
Observations on Accountability and Transparency in Ten NYPD Chokehold 
Cases  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD and CCRB should increase coordination and collaboration to 
reconsider and refine the disciplinary system for improper use of force. 
I 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should provide transparency with respect to the Police 
Commissioner’s disciplinary decisions. 
I 
Rec. 
3 
NYPD should expand the Internal Affairs Bureau’s access to newly filed 
complaints and substantive information on Use -of-Force cases filed with 
CCRB. 
I 
Rec. 
4 
NYPD should improve information sharing and case tracking for cases that 
are outsourced to borough and precinct investigators via the Office of the 
Chief of Department and Investigative Review Section. 
I 
Using Data from Lawsuits and Legal Claims Involving NYPD to Improve 
Policing  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1.1 
NYPD should perform a qualitative review of the most relevant data contained 
within legal claims and lawsuits against NYPD. Specifically: Nature of the 
claims/core allegations. 
I 
Rec. 
1.2 
NYPD should perform a qualitative review of the most relevant data contained 
within legal claims and lawsuits against NYPD. Specifically: Information about 
the subject police officer(s). 
I 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
19 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should create an interagency working group between NYPD, the 
Comptroller’s Office, and the Law Department to improve their police-
involved litigation data collection, coordination, and exchange. 
I 
Rec. 
3 
NYPD should provide the public with details about NYPD’s Early Intervention 
System and its litigation data analysis team and solicit suggestions for further 
development.13 
I 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD Should Perform a Qualitative Review of the Most Relevant Data 
Contained Within Legal Claims and Lawsuits Against NYPD. 
UC 
Rec. 
1.3 
NYPD should perform a qualitative review of the most relevant data contained 
within legal claims and lawsuits against NYPD. Specifically: the location of the 
alleged incident and address of the plaintiff(s).14 
UC 
 
Body-Worn Cameras in NYC: Assessment of NYPD’s Pilot Program and 
Recommendations to Promote Accountability  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1.1 
NYPD should broaden and illustrate the standard for the mandatory activation 
of BWCs during street or investigative encounters. 
I 
Rec. 
1.2 
NYPD should redefine the safety exception for recording. I 
Rec. 
1.3 
NYPD should consider stricter limitations on recording vulnerable populations. I 
 
13 The current Early Intervention program makes information available here: 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/nypd/stats/reports-analysis/early-intervention-program-reports.page changing 
the status of Rec. 3 from (PI) to (I). 
 
14 NYPD has agreed to analyze the location of incidents and seeks to house a data analysis team for analyzing 
data changing the status of Rec. 1.3 from (R) to (UC). 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
20 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1.4 
NYPD should expand BWC training for officers using BWCs. I 
Rec. 
2.1 
NYPD should provide an example notification phrase to advise members of the 
public that they are being recorded. 
I 
Rec. 
2.2 
NYPD should redefine the safety exception for notifications. I 
Rec. 
3.1 
NYPD should require supervisors to review footage related to documented 
incidents. 
I 
Rec. 
3.2 
NYPD should address discipline when the BWC program is more established 
and formalized. 
I 
Rec. 
3.3 
NYPD should computerize the random selection of officers for review. I 
Rec. 
3.4 
NYPD should establish a system for high-level and periodic review. I 
Rec. 
4.1 
NYPD should grant supervisors general access to BWC footage with restrictions 
on arbitrary review. 
I 
Rec. 
4.3 
NYPD should solicit feedback and suggestions for improvement from 
supervisors performing quality assurance reviews and officers participating in 
the Volunteer BWC Pilot Program. 
I 
Rec. 
5.1 
NYPD should develop policies to guide supervisors when officer infractions are 
observed on BWC footage. 
I 
Rec. 
5.2 
NYPD should institute mandatory reporting procedures. I 
Rec. 
5.3 
NYPD should integrate BWC recordings into NYPD’s existing force monitoring 
programs. 
I 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
21 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
6.2 
In all other instances, access to recordings prior to making statements should 
be noted in those statements. 
I 
Rec. 
7.1 
If and when disclosing BWC video, NYPD should provide privacy and safety 
protections for vulnerable populations. 
I 
Rec. 
8.1 
NYPD should establish a minimum retention period of at least 18 months. I 
Rec. 
9 
NYPD should incorporate government and public input in continuing to 
develop the BWC program. 
I 
Rec. 
4.2 
NYPD should integrate BWC footage review into NYPD’s field training 
program.15 
R 
Rec. 
6.1 
Access to BWC recordings should be limited where officers are under 
investigation or are witnesses in misconduct investigations. 
R 
Rec. 
7.2 
NYPD should ensure fairness between citizens’ and officers’ right to view BWC 
footage. 
R 
Rec. 
8.2 
NYPD should ensure expeditious purging of archived BWC footage that no 
longer holds evidentiary value. 
R 
 
Police Use of Force in New York City: Findings and Recommendations on 
NYPD’s Policies and Practices  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
The NYPD Patrol Guide should include definitional language that provides 
officers and the public with greater clarity regarding what is meant by 
“force,” “excessive force,” and “deadly physical force.” 
I 
 
15 While the Department uses BWC footage to train officers at the command level, in-service training and at the 
police academy, the Department's FTO Program is published by NYS DCJS and has a DCJS curriculum; therefore, 
Rec. 4.2 moved from (AIP) to (R).   
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
22 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should update Patrol Guide §203 -11 governing use of force and 
require officers to de-escalate all encounters where appropriate. 
I 
Rec. 
3 
NYPD should create a separate, uniform use-of-force reporting form. I 
Rec. 
5 
NYPD should create a database to track comprehensive Department -wide 
information on use of force, including data compiled from the use -of-force 
forms. 
I 
Rec. 
6 
NYPD should compile data and publish, on an annual basis, a report 
addressing Department -wide metrics on use of force, including but not 
limited to information from the new use-of-force reporting form. This report 
would track and collect various components related to the issue of use of 
force, including those addressed in this Report, such as officer tenure, 
assignments, age, type of force used, pertinent information regarding 
members of the public subjected to force, as well as officer injuries, 
disciplinary trends and outcomes, and other data deemed necessary for a 
comprehensive understanding of the issue. 
I 
Rec. 
7 
NYPD training should place a stronger and more thorough emphasis on de -
escalation tactics, by adding specific Police Academy and in -service courses 
on de -escalation that incorporate both classroom and scenario -based 
training. 
I 
Rec. 
8 
NYPD should incorporate a formal evaluation system for all scenario -based 
trainings concerning the use of force. 
I 
Rec. 
9 
NYPD should increase funding and personnel at the Police Academy with 
respect to training for both recruits and in-service officers. 
I 
Rec. 
10 
NYPD should implement training to instruct officers to intervene in 
situations where other officers escalate encounters, use excessive force, 
and/or commit other misconduct. 
I 
Rec. 
11 
NYPD should review use -of-force trends to identify which categories of 
officers (e.g., by years of service and/or duty assignments) are most in need 
of de -escalation and use- of-force in- service training, and then implement 
such instruction. 
I 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
23 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
12 
In disciplinary cases where there are multiple disciplinary counts, each count 
should have an accompanying distinct penalty, as opposed to an aggregated 
penalty for all counts. 
I 
Rec. 
13 
NYPD should collect, review, and compare data regarding disciplinary 
penalties imposed in use -of-force cases and report on the effects of 
disciplinary penalties on the frequency of incidents of excessive force. NYPD 
should publish data in the previously mentioned annual report 
(Recommendation 6) on the number and percentage of cases in which the 
Police Commissioner reduces or declines discipline. 
I 
Rec. 
14 
NYPD should set forth, in writing, in its disciplinary paperwork, the extent to 
which an officer’s placement on force monitoring has or has not impacted the 
penalty imposed. 
I 
Rec. 
15 
NYPD should share a subject officer’s force monitoring history with CCRB’s 
Administrative Prosecution Unit (APU) since this information is a critical 
element that must be taken into consideration when CCRB recommends 
penalties. 
I 
Rec. 
4 
NYPD should require all officers — whether the subject of a force 
investigation or a witness to a use of force—to document and report all force 
incidents.  When completing this document, officers should use descriptive 
language to articulate the events leading up to the use of force in encounters 
with the public, the reason why the force was used, and the level and type of 
force used. 
R 
 
  
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
24 
2016 
An Analysis o f Quality -Of-Life Summonses, Quality -Of-Life Misdemeanor 
Arrests, and Felony Crimes in New York City, 2010-2015 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
4 
NYPD should release incident -level and geographically -coded data on 
summonses and misdemeanor arrests. 
I 
Rec. 
5 NYPD should release historical incident-level and geographic data. I 
Rec. 
6 
NYPD should ensure that data currently released in yearly formats also 
include more granular temporal data, including month-to-month formats and 
incident-level data. 
I 
Rec. 
7 
All incident -level crime data, from felony arrests and complaints to 
misdemeanor arrests and summonses, should be released in the same 
accessible spreadsheet file format (.csv or similar file format). 
I 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD should assess the relative effectiveness of quality -of-life summonses, 
quality-of-life misdemeanor arrests, and other disorder reduction strategies 
in reducing felony crime, demonstrating whether statistically significant 
relationships exist between t hese particular disorder reduction tactics and 
specific felony crimes. 
R 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should conduct an analysis to determine whether quality -of-life 
enforcement disproportionately impacts black and Hispanic residents, males 
aged 15-20, and NYCHA residents. 
R 
Rec. 
3 
NYPD should expand consideration regarding quality -of-life enforcement 
beyond short-term real-time conditions. 
R 
 
 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
25 
An Investigation of NYPD’s Compliance with Rules Governing Investigations of 
Political Activity  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
For investigations of political activity, NYPD should use a formal mechanism 
for tracking investigative deadlines and should ensure that, where needed, 
extensions are approved prior to required deadlines. 
I 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should use a formal case - 
tracking mechanism that identifies when investigations advance to the next 
investigative level. 
I 
Rec. 
3 
For the use of confidential informants and undercover officers in 
investigations of political activity, NYPD should use a formal mechanism for 
tracking expiration deadlines and ensure that extensions are approved prior 
to the expiration of an authorization. 
I 
Rec. 
5 
For authorizations and renewals of investigations, NYPD should create 
controls to ensure that authorizations to renew or extend investigations 
properly capture the date, signature, and approval of the authorizing 
officials. 
I 
Rec. 
8 
NYPD should create controls to ensure that authorizations to use or extend 
the use of human sources properly capture the date, signature, and approval 
of the appropriate supervisor. 
I 
Rec. 
9 
NYPD’s Human Source Authorization Form should include the number of the 
extension request and the date of the last extension. 
I 
Rec. 
4 
For requests to extend a Preliminary Inquiry, NYPD should ensure that 
Investigative Statements capture fact -specific reasons why further 
investigative steps are warranted. 
R 
Rec. 
6 
NYPD’s Human Source Authorization Form should require members of 
NYPD’s Intelligence Bureau to specify the role of the undercover officer or 
confidential informant.   
R 
Rec. 
7 
NYPD should specify, when extending use of an undercover or confidential 
informant, the reason for the extension.   
R 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
26 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
10 
NYPD should consolidate its policies and procedures for investigations 
involving political activity into a unified handbook.   
R 
Rec. 
11 
NYPD should develop written guidelines concerning informational 
standards for Preliminary Inquiries, Full Investigations, and Terrorism 
Enterprise Investigations.   
R 
 
  
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
27 
2017 
Putting Training into Practice: A Review of NYPD’s Approach to Handling 
Interactions with People in Mental Crisis  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD should commit to creating timelines for any changes to its CIT 
initiative within 90 days of the publication of this Report. 
I 
Rec. 
3 
NYPD should create a dedicated mental health unit, or at the very least 
appoint a CIT coordinator who holds the rank of chief, in order to 
manage all aspects of a CIT program. 
I 
Rec. 
4 
NYPD should revise its Patrol Guide to explicitly authorize CIT-trained 
officers to use the skills learned in CIT training during crisis situations. 
I 
Rec. 
5 
NYPD should revise its Patrol Guide to require that CIT-trained officers 
respond to all crisis incidents whenever possible. 
I 
Rec. 
6 
NYPD should revise its Patrol Guide to allow all officers to use their 
discretion to refer individuals to officially approved and vetted outside 
community resources in appropriate incidents. 
I 
Rec. 
7 
NYPD should either substantially revise one of its current forms or 
develop a new permanent form to capture more useful data on 
incidents involving persons in crisis. 
I 
Rec. 
8 NYPD should analyze data regarding mental crisis incidents. I 
Rec. 
9 NYPD should consider training more officers in CIT. I 
Rec. 
10 
NYPD should begin training 911 call takers and dispatchers in at least 
some aspects of CIT. 
I 
Rec. 
11 
In every CIT training, NYPD should ensure that its officers interact with 
people living with mental illnesses. 
I 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
28 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
12 
In every CIT training, NYPD should assess the retention of officers’ 
skills. 
I 
Rec. 
13 
NYPD should provide a manual or reference guide to officers who 
undergo CIT training. 
I 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should adjust its dispatch procedures to ensure that officers with 
CIT training are directed to crisis incidents. 
PI 
 
Addressing Inefficiencies in NYPD’s Handling of Complaints: An Investigation 
of the “Outside Guidelines” Complaint Process 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD should update and unify the computer systems it uses to track 
and manage OG cases by upgrading OCD IRS from BCATS to ICIS (or an 
ICIS - compatible system). 
I 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should establish a uniform timeframe for completing OG 
investigations and a uniform system of tracking due dates. 
I 
Rec. 
4 
NYPD should revise the current OG Disposition and Penalty Form to 
include a box denoting the case’s due date as well as a date section for 
each stage of the investigation. 
I 
Rec. 
5 
NYPD should implement a web -based procedure for communicating 
the status and results of externally generated OG investigations back to 
the community members who filed the complaints. 
I 
Rec. 
3 
If an OG investigation has not been completed within 90 days, the 
assigned supervising investigator should be required to request an 
extension from OCD IRS in writing, stating the reason for this request. 
PI 
Rec. 
6 
NYPD should publish quarterly reports on OG complaints. R 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
29 
 
When Undocumented Immigrants are Crime Victims: An Assessment of 
NYPD’s Handling of U Visa Certification Requests  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
2 
When denying a U visa certification request based on the applicant’s 
criminal history, NYPD should articulate, in its internal file, the reasons 
why the criminal history presents an ongoing public safety concern and 
warrants denial. 
I 
Rec. 
3 
If NYPD’s investigative file states that the applicant was not cooperative 
but the applicant certification request or other information in the 
investigative file suggests the applicant had a reasonable basis for not 
helping law enforcement, NYPD should ass ess whether the non -
cooperation was reasonable by contacting both the NYPD personnel 
who investigated the incident and the party requesting the U visa 
certification.
16 
I 
Rec. 
5 
If an arrest has been made on the underlying crime, NYPD should 
evaluate U visa certification requests if the criminal case has closed. 
I 
Rec. 
8 
NYPD should publish contact information for its reviewers and 
certifying officials. 
I 
Rec. 
10 
NYPD should develop informational training on U visas for specialized 
NYPD units that frequently encounter immigrant communities.17 
I 
Rec. 
4 
NYPD should provide a written rationale in its internal file when 
concluding that the applicant was not a victim of a qualifying crime.18 
PI 
 
16 Recommendation 3 was changed from partially implemented to implemented with the memorialization of 
Department policy regarding uncooperative U Visa applicants in Patrol Guide Procedure 207 -37. 
17 NYPD provided OIG-NYPD with a copy of their training on U-visas for uniformed members of the Department 
who frequently encounter immigrant communities changing Rec. 10 from (PI) to (I).  
18 A form containing a list of qualifying crimes as well as the crime the applicant was subjected to is included in 
the internal file of each applicant; however, it is not codified that the narrative be completed with reasoning as 
to why an applica nt did not meet the criteria for a U visa, changing Rec. 4 from (R) to (PI) ; pending further 
review during the next annual report cycle.  
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
30 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
7 
NYPD’s denial letters should articulate specific reasons for each denial, 
using the facts of the case to explain the decision.19 
PI 
Rec. 
9 
NYPD should develop written materials regarding the U visa program 
for dissemination at precincts and other locations where victims may 
encounter police.20 
PI 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD should develop concrete, written standards on how to conduct 
an assessment of an applicant’s criminal background and on the types 
of criteria that warrant denial of the certification request. 
R 
Rec. 
6 
NYPD should create and publish its complete standards for certification 
eligibility. 
R 
 
Review of NYPD’s Implementation of Patrol Guide Procedures Concerning 
Transgender and Gender Non-Conforming People  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD should provide mandatory in-service training and accompanying 
resource materials on the 2012 Patrol Guide revisions to all uniformed 
members through the NYPD-U webinar platform. Training attendance 
and completion should be tracked to ensure that all m embers of the 
police force have received this training. NYPD should conduct this 
training within the next six months. 
I 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should create a memo book insert for officers with a summary of 
the revised LGBTQ protocols. Officers can use this for reference as 
needed. 
I 
 
19 NYPD’s denial letters indicate broad categories for denial and do not contain case specific details which 
changes Rec. 7 from (R) to (PI) 
20 NYPD’s creation of a draft certification brochure for the Domestic Violence U-visa Unit containing the Family 
Justice Center’s hours of operation and contact information changes Rec. 9 from (R) to (PI).  
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
31 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
3 
Community input should be carefully considered and incorporated as 
appropriate into the curriculum of officer training on LGBTQ issues. 
I 
Rec. 
4 
All handouts and additional resource materials provided during LGBTQ 
trainings should be consistent, as appropriate, ensuring that officers 
receive the same information. 
I 
Rec. 
7 
NYPD should consult with its LGBT Advisory Committee and re -
examine whether and how to record gender identity information of 
TGNC people on NYPD forms and databases. The collection of this 
information is a sensitive matter for some members of the LGBTQ 
community. Any changes in how such information is recorded must not 
interfere with NYPD’s ability to describe and circulate descriptions of 
suspects and persons of interest for purposes of apprehension. 
I 
Rec. 
5 
Within six months, NYPD should report to OIG-NYPD whether and how 
the Department will change remaining forms and databases to record 
an individual’s preferred name in a separate field. 
PI 
Rec. 
6 
On a periodic basis, NYPD should make sure that police stations are 
using updated forms, particularly those documents that are intended to 
comply with the 2012 revisions. 
AIP 
Rec. 
8 
NYPD Internal Affairs Bureau’s complaint system should be configured 
to categorize and track all LGBTQ -related allegations that implicate 
biased conduct, and not just “profiling.” LGBTQ -related allegations 
involving bias would include violations of the 201 2 Patrol Guide 
revisions and “offensive language.” 
R 
Rec. 
9 
IAB should report patterns and trends associated with LGBTQ -related 
complaints to NYPD’s LGBT Liaison to the Police Commissioner as well 
as to DOI pursuant to NYPD’s reporting obligations under Local Law 70. 
R 
 
  
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
32 
2018 
An Investigation of NYPD’s New Force Reporting System  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD should add a field to the “Force Used” section of the arrest report 
for officers to note the associated T.R.I. incident number(s). 
I 
Rec. 
3 
NYPD should add a narrative section to the T.R.I. and require officers to 
provide a full account of the force incident, including specific details on 
the force used by the officer and/or members of the public, the 
chronology of the force encounter, as well as any injuries sustained by 
either. 
I 
Rec. 
4 
NYPD should add additional checkboxes to the T.R.I. worksheet to allow 
for more specificity in describing the force used by an officer, including 
a closed fist strike, an open-hand strike, and a knee strike. 
I 
Rec. 
5 
NYPD should add a section to the T.R.I. worksheet that prompts officers 
to indicate where exactly on the person’s body force was used. 
I 
Rec. 
7 
NYPD should require desk officers to question the involved officers 
about any force used during arrest processing so that the command log 
accurately reflects the force incident.
 
I 
Rec. 
10 
NYPD must enhance supervisory review of all arrest -related 
documentation at the local command level. In high-volume commands, 
NYPD should assign specially trained  supervisors at the rank of 
sergeant or above to carefully review such documents during arrest 
processing to ensure that all uses of reportable force are properly 
documented. 
I 
Rec. 
11 
NYPD should dedicate well-trained and knowledgeable personnel to be 
available by phone during all shifts to answer questions from command 
supervisors regarding T.R.I. worksheets and approval. NYPD should 
consider removing this function from the Internal Affairs Bureau. 
I 
Rec. 
12 
NYPD should include in Patrol Guide series 221 a clear and 
unambiguous definition of “reportable force” by officers. The current 
policy provides a definition of force when used against officers and 
defines three levels of force by officers, but a lack of c larity still exists 
I 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
33 
# Recommendation Status 
for many officers regarding whether certain actions constitute 
reportable force. 
Rec. 
13 
NYPD should establish a clear policy that requires arresting officers to 
select “Yes” on the arrest report in response to the “Force Used” section 
if any officer used reportable force during the encounter. 
I 
Rec. 
14 
NYPD should impose appropriate discipline against arresting officers 
who fail to select “Force Used: Yes” on the arrest report when 
reportable force is found to have been used. 
I 
Rec. 
15 
NYPD should revise policies to ensure that the narrative or “Remarks” 
section of Medical Treatment of Prisoner forms include fact -specific 
details sufficient to explain the individual’s condition and, where 
known, what caused the condition. If an individual sustained an injury 
in the course of the police encounter, the form should specify the type 
of injury and its cause.
 
I 
Rec. 
16 
NYPD should provide officers with more training and formal reminders 
on (a) when and how to complete a T.R.I. form and the importance of 
submitting the T.R.I. form, and (b) how to write a detailed account of a 
force encounter (should a narrative section is added to the T.R.I. form).
 
I 
Rec. 
17 
NYPD should provide more training for desk officers, integrity control 
officers, precinct training sergeants, and other supervisors to (a) 
ensure T.R.I. compliance and proper supervisory review of completed 
T.R.I. worksheets, and (b) closely examine the arrest report narratives 
and the “Force Used” section on the arrest reports to ensure that 
officers are selecting “Yes” for “Force Used” when force was used. 
I 
Rec. 
19 
NYPD’s Force Review process should include quality -control 
procedures that seek to improve the accuracy of force reporting not 
only on T.R.I. forms, but also on arrest reports and other arrest-related 
documentation. 
I 
Rec. 
21B 
NYPD should use data from T.R.I. forms to publish annual Use-of-Force 
reports that identify and analyze trends in all force categories. The 
report should contain all information currently mandated by law and 
include the following trend analyses:  B) Types of interactions leading 
to injuries; 
I 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
34 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
21C 
NYPD should use data from T.R.I. forms to publish annual Use-of-Force 
reports that identify and analyze trends in all force categories. The 
report should contain all information currently mandated by law and 
include the following trend analyses:  C) Officer use of force based on 
job tenure and experience; 
I 
Rec. 
21E 
NYPD should use data from T.R.I. forms to publish annual Use-of-Force 
reports that identify and analyze trends in all force categories. The 
report should contain all information currently mandated by law and 
include the following trend analyses: E) Demographic characteristics of 
members of the public and officers involved in force incidents;  
• Are there disparities in the types or amount of force used based on 
age, gender, race, national origin, precinct, or other factors?  
• What are the reasons for such disparities? 
I 
Rec. 
18 
NYPD should conduct an annual audit of T.R.I. compliance and include 
the results in its annual and public Use-of-Force report. 
PI 
Rec. 
21D 
NYPD should use data from T.R.I. forms to publish annual Use-of-Force 
reports that identify and analyze trends in all force categories. The 
report should contain all information currently mandated by law and 
include the following trend analyses:  D) Commands with the highest 
rates of force; 
• Is the frequency of force consistent with crime and arrest rates in 
these commands? 
• Are certain units more or less likely to employ force? 
PI 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should continue to develop its software capabilities, which now 
initiate the creation of a T.R.I. number when an officer indicates on an 
arrest report that force was used, to also prompt officers that they may 
have to complete a T.R.I. when certain arrest charges are entered (such 
as Resisting Arrest or Assault on a Police Officer), when the arrest 
report indicates an arrestee or officer injury has occurred, and in other 
similar scenarios. 
R 
Rec. 
6 
NYPD should impose (a) an “end of tour” deadline by which officers 
must complete a required T.R.I. form, with appropriate exceptions, and 
(b) appropriate discipline against officers who fail to meet the deadline, 
except when certain exceptions apply. 
R 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
35 
 
 
An Investigation of NYPD’s Special Victims Division – Adult Sex Crimes  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
5 
NYPD should increase in -house training opportunities for SVD staff in 
order to better prepare them for the rigors and unique nature of SVD 
work. The depth and rigor of this training should be equivalent to the 
training provided to other specialized units in NYPD. 
I 
 
21 Arrest Reports are digitized and effectively indicate when force is used.  Requesting the Department to record 
when force is used  in the command log  is duplicative and less practical for review and oversight given the 
update to electronic record-keeping. As such, rec. 8 is moved from (R) to (NLA). 
22 Arrest Reports are digitized and effectively indicate when force is used.  Requesting the Department to record 
when force is used in the command log is duplicative and less practical for review and oversight given the 
update to electronic record-keeping. As such, rec. 9 is moved from (R) to (NLA). 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
21A 
NYPD should use data from T.R.I. forms to publish annual Use-of-Force 
reports that identify and analyze trends in all force categories. The 
report should contain all information currently mandated by law and 
include the following trend analyses: A) All for ce encounters 
disaggregated by the reason force was used. 
R 
Rec. 
8 
NYPD should reinstate the “Force Used” checkbox on the arrest -
processing stamp used in precinct command logs and add an entry on 
the stamp for force details and the T.R.I. incident number.21 
NLA 
Rec. 
9 
NYPD should prompt desk officers to record the details of a force 
incident and the T.R.I. incident number in the command log, including 
details from the “Force Used” checkbox on the arrest-processing stamp, 
as required by Patrol Guide Series 221.22 
NLA 
Rec. 
20 
NYPD should standardize the quarterly reporting mechanism for 
bureau and patrol borough commanders and ensure that their 
quarterly T.R.I. reports are submitted to the First Deputy 
Commissioner in a timely fashion. 
NLA 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
36 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
6 
To the extent that it is inevitable that patrol officers may be the first to 
respond to sexual assaults in exigent circumstances, NYPD should 
expand existing training, both in-service and at the academy, to include 
trauma-informed care and best practices regarding sexual assault. 
I 
Rec. 
7 
NYPD should formally end the “triaging” process for sex crimes —
instead, all sex crimes should be investigated and enhanced by SVD 
detectives, including patrol arrests for “domestic rape” and 
“acquaintance rape.” The implementation of this recommendation will 
have staffing implications that are not accounted for in 
Recommendation 1 above, and NYPD should, therefore, include 
appropriate staffing increases in implementing this recommendation.
 
I 
Rec. 
10 
NYPD should take steps to safeguard the identifying information of sex 
crimes victims, including conducting a review of the various reports, 
forms, and memoranda generated during the course of a sex crimes 
investigation that unnecessarily require the victim’s name, address, or 
other contact information. 
I 
Rec. 
11 
NYPD should review the use of CompStat as the oversight mechanism 
for SVD. 
I 
Rec. 
12 
NYPD should increase and publicize existing efforts to encourage 
victims of sex crimes to come forward and report these crimes to law 
enforcement. At the same time, NYPD should take new steps to advise 
policy makers and the public that success in this area  will result in an 
apparent rise in the “index crime numbers” for sexual assault cases, 
even if the “true” rate of sex crimes remains unchanged.
 
I 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD should immediately increase the staffing level in SVD’s adult sex 
crime units to meet the minimum investigative capacity required by an 
evidence backed and nationally -accepted staffing analysis model. To 
appropriately handle a caseload as seen in 2017 , that model would 
require an additional 21 detectives in Manhattan SVS, 11 detectives in 
Bronx SVS, 16 detectives in Queens SVS, 21 detectives in Brooklyn SVS, 
and four detectives to in Staten Island SVS.
 
PI 
Rec. 
4 
NYPD should immediately take steps to improve SVD’s ability to recruit 
and retain experienced detectives by making SVD a “graded” division. 
Once completed, NYPD should end the practice of transferring officers 
to SVD without extensive investigative experience. 
PI 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
37 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
8 
NYPD should find new physical locations and/or completely renovate 
all five SVD adult sex crime unit locations. These new physical locations 
should be easily accessible from public transportation and built out in 
the model of the Children’s Advocacy Centers now operational in New 
York City. 
PI 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should adopt an evidence-based investigative staffing model that 
relies on actual investigative hours available and projected caseload 
and continuously monitor SVD caseloads and staffing levels to ensure 
the appropriate number of staff are available for the assigned 
caseloads.23 
AIP 
Rec. 
3 
NYPD should use the staffing model adopted in Recommendation 2 to 
appropriately staff the other SVD sub-units.24 
AIP 
Rec. 
9 
NYPD should invest in a new case management system for SVD that 
would replace ECMS. The new system should have the highest security 
protocols and limit access to the case detective and their immediate 
supervisors within SVD. In addition, any new system sho uld have 
advanced caseload, staff management, and data analysis capabilities.
 
AIP 
 
Ongoing Examination of Litigation Data Involving NYPD  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
3 
NYPD should regularly enter data about claims naming individual 
officers into its new Risk Assessment Information Liability System 
(RAILS), or comparable early intervention system, so that NYPD is 
aware of at-risk officers who may require assistance. 
I 
 
23 The NYPD reviews caseloads monthly to ensure that the projected numbers remain consistent with the 
targeted case load identified by the Commanding Officer; therefore, until the practice is codified Rec. 2 and Rec. 
3 are (AIP) as opposed to (R).   
24 Rec. 3 recommends that the NYPD use the method used for staffing adopted in rec. 2 to apply to sub -units 
and based on the two recommendations connection, rec. 3 is also (AIP) as opposed to (R).  
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
38 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
4 
NYPD should create public reports that do not violate rules of 
confidentiality, taking care to disclose only the number and the general 
nature of claims filed against the Department as well as the current 
state of any interventions or policy changes.25 
PI 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD should analyze Department -wide litigation patterns and trends 
as well as observable patterns and trends within individual precincts 
and units in order to identify areas for improvement in Department 
policies, training, supervision, and tactics. In pay ing greater attention 
to data within individual precincts, NYPD should review and analyze 
patterns and trends such as those shown in DOI’s analysis of the 77th 
Precinct.26 
UC 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should create internal reports that describe specific Department-
wide and precinct or unit level patterns and trends in legal claims and 
should share these reports with command leadership.27 
UC 
Rec. 
5 
NYPD should increase the number of employees focusing primarily on 
tracking litigation trends in order for NYPD to conduct proactive 
litigation analysis so that patterns and trends can be identified, tracked, 
and, where necessary, addressed. 
R 
 
 
25 Local Law 166 requires the NYC Law Department to publish claims against the Department and as such, OIG-
NYPD reassessed this recommendation moving it from (R) to (PI) as the information requested is in part 
publicly available.   
26 The current Early Intervention Program is distinct from the one assessed in 2018, and the Department is 
willing to consider more actively utilizing the litigation data provided to it by the Law Department and  
published by the Law Department pursuant to Local Law 166 moving Rec. 1 from (R) to (UC).  
27 As noted in response to the 2015 Litigation Data report, the Department is willing to consider more actively 
utilizing the litigation provided and published by the Law Department bringing Rec. 2 (UC) from (R).  
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
39 
2019 
2019 Assessment of Litigation Data Involving NYPD 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD should consider incorporating peer officer averages and 
performance indicator ratios in its thresholds for RAILS, or other 
approaches that would account for officers with greater activity who 
may not necessarily exhibit problematic behavior. 
NLA28 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should seek input from supervisors in further developments of 
RAILS and create a mechanism for supervisors to direct their feedback. 
Supervisors should be involved in each stage of the development and 
implementation process for RAILS. NYPD should have a formal, 
standing mechanism for supervisors to direct their feedback, including 
any problems or concerns with the system. 
NLA 
Rec. 
3 
NYPD should ensure that sufficient and ongoing training is available to 
all supervisors once RAILS is fully developed. Such training should 
specifically take into account supervisors’ new roles and 
responsibilities with the system. 
NLA 
Rec. 
4 
NYPD should ensure there are procedures in place before RAILS is fully 
implemented to hold supervisors accountable for upholding their 
responsibilities concerning the system. These procedures should 
include a policy outlining how often supervisors should log on to RAILS 
and review their alerts. NYPD should also take steps to confirm that 
supervisors are following this policy as directed, such as by conducting 
regular audits of the system. 
NLA 
 
 
 
 
 
28 Each of the four recommendations drafted in the 2019 Assessment of Litigation Data Involving NYPD Report 
are no longer applicable due to the dissolution of NYPD’s Risk Assessment Information Liability System 
(“RAILS”). 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
40 
Complaints of Biased Policing in New York City: An Assessment of NYPD’s 
Investigations, Policies, and Training29 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
4 
Consistent with NYPD’s investigative training, NYPD should amend its 
written investigative procedures to document the number of attempts 
that investigators must make to contact complainants for interviews 
when investigating biased policing complaints before the case is closed. 
I 
Rec. 
5 
NYPD should amend its written investigative procedures to require 
investigators to attempt to interview incarcerated complainants when 
such complainants are being held at a jail located within the five 
boroughs of New York City (regardless of whether the j ail is managed 
by NYC Department of Correction, NYS Department of Corrections and 
Community Supervision, or the federal Bureau of Prisons). 
I 
Rec. 
6 
Consistent with NYPD’s investigative training, NYPD should amend its 
written investigative procedures to state that a guilty status, plea, or 
conviction does not resolve the issue of whether an officer or a non -
uniformed employee engaged in discriminatory conduct, even if the 
criminal matter and the complaint of biased policing arise from the 
same set of underlying facts.
 
I 
Rec. 
7 
NYPD should amend its written investigative procedures to state that a 
complainant’s previous criminal history should not be dispositive of 
whether a biased policing allegation is substantiated. Where NYPD 
does regard the complainant’s previous criminal history as a factor in a 
non-substantiation decision, the investigator should articulate how the 
criminal history impacted the decision and the investigator must still 
complete a full investigation of the allegation. 
I 
Rec. 
8 
Consistent with NYPD’s investigative training, the Department should 
amend its written investigative procedures to state that a subject 
officer’s race/ethnicity or other protected status should not be 
determinative in deciding whether to substantiate a biased policing 
allegation, even when the officer (or non -uniformed employee) and 
complainant identify as members of the same race/ethnicity or other 
protected group. 
I 
 
29 Recommendation 20-21 are related to CCRB and have been implemented by the CCRB.  
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
41 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
9 
NYPD should make records of complaints and investigations of biased 
policing allegations available to CCHR for analysis and review. 
I 
Rec. 
10 
NYPD investigators should not be assigned investigations of biased 
policing allegations until they complete the formal “Profiling and Bias-
Based Policing” training for investigating such complaints. 
I 
Rec. 
13 
Deputy Chiefs should receive training and reminders emphasizing that 
biased policing investigations can only be closed when proper 
investigative protocols have been followed, unless such protocols were 
impossible to implement or inapplicable to the particular case. 
I 
Rec. 
20 
CCRB should add all the protected statuses, such as “National Origin,” 
“Color,” “Age,” “Alienage,” “Citizenship Status,” and “Housing Status” as 
outlined in § 14- 151 of the NYC Administrative Code and § 203 -25 of 
NYPD’s Patrol Guide, to the sub-classifications of its Offensive Language 
category. 
I 
Rec. 
21 
CCRB should adopt a policy to classify and investigate allegations of 
biased policing by uniformed members of NYPD under its Abuse of 
Authority jurisdiction instead of referring such allegations to IAB for 
investigation. Consistent with this new authority, CCRB should request 
additional resources from the City to take on this new responsibility if 
the agency can demonstrate that more resources are necessary. 
I 
Rec. 
22 
City agencies that handle biased policing complaints (NYPD, CCRB, 
CCHR) should convene within the next four months to address the 
findings and recommendations in OIGNYPD’s investigation. This would, 
for example, include developing standard categories and definitions for 
how these complaints are grouped and sub-classified. 
I 
Rec. 
23 
NYPD, CCRB, and CCHR should develop protocols and procedures to 
share data and information on biased policing complaints on a regular 
basis. To the extent that implementing this Report’s recommendations 
would require CCRB or CCHR to have prompt access to N YPD records 
(e.g., case files, data, body -worn camera video, etc.), protocols should 
I 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
42 
# Recommendation Status 
be established so that NYPD will commit itself to providing such access 
to these agencies.30 
Rec. 
18 
NYPD should develop written materials to educate the public about 
what biased policing is and how members of the public can file biased 
policing complaints. This information should be conspicuously visible 
on NYPD’s website and in other locations where suc h information 
would be readily available to the public. 
I 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD should amend its Patrol Guide policies to explicitly require NYPD 
officers and non -uniformed employees to report instances of biased 
policing upon observing or becoming aware of such conduct. 
AIP 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should amend its Patrol Guide policies so that complaints 
alleging the use of offensive or derogatory language associated with an 
individual’s actual or perceived protected status, such as racial slurs, 
are classified as biased policing if there is a discriminatory intent. 
AIP 
Rec. 
17 
NYPD’s Performance Monitoring Program should develop monitoring 
criteria to include officers and non -uniformed employees who are the 
subject of biased policing complaints, regardless of substantiation, 
modeled on the metrics currently in use for excessive force complaints. 
UC 
Rec. 
3 
NYPD should amend its written investigative procedures related to 
biased policing so that offensive or derogatory language associated 
with an individual’s actual or perceived protected status, such as an 
officer’s use of racial slurs, is classified, investigated, and adjudicated as 
a biased policing matter. 
R 
Rec. 
11 
NYPD should develop a checklist of all the required protocols for 
investigating allegations of biased policing, such as interviewing 
complainants and sub-classifying all applicable protected statuses.
 
R 
Rec. 
12 
Investigators should be required to complete and submit to their 
supervisors the checklist with their case closing reports. 
R 
 
30 All necessary protocols have been implemented both internally and with CCRB and have been proven 
effective to ensure timely compliance with the Department's obligations under the profiling MOU entered 
between the agencies. Thus, Recommendation 23 moved from (PI) to (I). 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
43 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
14 
With respect to complaints of biased policing, NYPD should ensure that 
IAB’s case management system contains the same controls found in the 
ICMT system used by NYPD’s Bureau/Borough investigators, including 
controls regarding the requisite number of attemp ts to contact 
complainants. This will ensure that the necessary requirements of an 
investigation are completed prior to the closure of all biased policing 
cases.
 
R 
Rec. 
15 
NYPD should develop and implement a pilot mediation program for 
some biased policing complaints. As part of that program, NYPD should 
develop criteria for referring to mediation cases involving both 
uniformed and non-uniformed members. 
R 
Rec. 
19 
NYPD should publish statistics for the public as part of an annual report 
covering biased policing. These statistics should, at a minimum, include 
a breakdown of the following: (i) the subject officer’s uniformed versus 
non-uniformed status, bureau or unit  assignment, gender, 
race/ethnicity, age, and length of service to the Department; (ii) the 
self-reported demographics (race/ethnicity, sex, age, etc.) of 
complainants; (iii) the types of police encounters that resulted in 
complaints of biased policing; (iv) the number of biased policing 
complaints initiated by borough and precinct; (v) the discriminatory 
policing conduct alleged; (vi) the sub -classifications and outcomes of 
such complaints; and (vii) the status of the Department’s efforts to 
prevent biased  policing. This information should be conspicuously 
visible on NYPD’s website and in other locations where such 
information would be readily available to the public. 
R 
Rec. 
16 
NYPD’s RAILS should be expanded to capture unsubstantiated biased 
policing allegations involving both uniformed and non -uniformed 
members.31 
NLA 
 
 
31 Due to the dissolution of NYPD’s Risk Assessment Information Liability System (“RAILS”)  use within the 
Department, rec. 16 moved from (AIP) to (NLA).  
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
44 
An Investigation of NYPD’s Officer Wellness and Safety Services  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
To guide the Department’s efforts and memorialize the Department’s 
commitments, NYPD should develop an overarching Mental Health and 
Wellness policy that articulates goals, establishes standards, and 
outlines relevant programs and resources. This policy wo uld 
encompass the recommendations in this Report, the work of the Mental 
Health and Wellness Coordinator, and the efforts of the Mental Health 
and Wellness Task Force and the Health and Wellness Section. 
I 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should use the results of its own recent 2019 officer survey on 
health and wellness (and, if necessary, conduct additional officer 
surveys with the assistance of outside experts) to inform the 
Department’s overall Mental Health and Wellness policy referenced in 
Recommendation 1. 
I 
Rec. 
3 
Consistent with the size of the Department, NYPD should increase the 
staffing levels in the Health and Wellness Section to include full -time 
licensed mental health professionals and support staff with 
appropriate levels of competency in the areas of mental health and 
wellness. 
I 
Rec. 
4 
NYPD’s Health and Wellness Section should have access to specific 
internal data that would assist the Section with identifying behavioral 
themes or trends in the conduct of NYPD personnel so as to inform the 
work of the Section. 
I 
Rec. 
5 
NYPD should retain outside mental health experts to review and audit 
the current range of Department -wide health and wellness trainings 
provided by NYPD to personnel, many of which are new, and ask these 
experts to recommend to NYPD what additional training, if any, should 
be developed and delivered.
 
I 
Rec. 
6 
NYPD should study the feasibility of establishing mandatory periodic 
mental health checks for all police officers or certain categories of at -
risk officers. 
I 
Rec. 
7 
NYPD should modify its early intervention system — Risk Assessment 
Information Liability System (RAILS)—to include an “officer wellness” 
category, based on various relevant indicators, so that NYPD personnel 
requiring officer wellness intervention can be identified. 
I 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
45 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
8 
NYPD should establish clear written procedures on debriefing NYPD 
personnel in the wake of critical incidents and follow up with these 
officers after the debriefing sessions. 
I 
Rec. 
9 
NYPD should collaborate with the National Officer Safety and Wellness 
Group to help amplify new and existing efforts to reduce suicide among 
NYPD personnel. 
I 
Rec. 
10 
NYPD should establish a mandatory program that provides NYPD 
personnel approaching retirement with helpful information on the 
availability of support services following separation, adjusting to life as 
a member of the public, financial advisement, and medi cal and 
retirement benefits. 
I 
Rec. 
11 
NYPD should explore the needs of its retired personnel and endeavor 
to make wellness support services available to them for a reasonable 
period of time following retirement or separation. 
I 
Rec. 
12 
In implementing the recommendations in this Report, NYPD should put 
in place mechanisms to ensure that the privacy rights of NYPD 
personnel are respected and strictly protected, both internally and 
externally, so that information relating to officer health and wellness is 
not misused and is accessible only by those who need to know. Such 
efforts should be informed by discussions with officers and 
representative organizations like police unions and fraternal 
organizations.32 
PI 
 
  
 
 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
46 
2021 
Sharing Police Body Worn Camera Footage in New York City  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
3 
Within six months of the release of this Report, NYPD should consult 
with each of the covered Charter § 808 agencies, as well as OIG -NYPD, 
to determine whether additional access to BWC footage would benefit 
them in fulfilling their mandates, and engage in good faith discussions 
to expand or streamline access if necessary. 
AIP 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD should conduct an internal review to ensure that sealed BWC 
footage is not being commingled with unsealed BWC footage, and, if 
necessary, enact software- level safeguards to prevent sealed BWC 
footage from being viewed (either within or without NYPD) w ithout a 
court order or waiver. 
R 
Rec. 
2 
In an effort to more efficiently produce BWC footage and assist CCRB in 
fulfilling its mandate, NYPD should provide CCRB with independent 
and direct remote access credentials to all BWC storage databases so 
that BWC videos can be searched and viewed as nec essary for CCRB 
investigations. Such access should be subject to appropriate credentials 
and audit trails to address security and privacy concerns. 
R 
 
  
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
47 
2022 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Response to the POST Act33 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD should issue an IUP for each individual surveillance technology, 
as opposed to continuing its practice of grouping similar technologies 
under a single IUP. 
I 
Rec. 
4 
NYPD should include in each IUP the potential disparate impacts on 
protected groups of the use and deployment of the surveillance 
technology itself. 
I 
Rec. 
5 
NYPD should revise the Health & Safety Reporting sections of all 
published IUPs, to include any safety hazards that are identifiable on 
the basis of existing research, manufacturer warnings, or evaluations 
by experts in the field, or to state that no such hazards have been 
identified after a search for relevant information. 
I 
Rec. 
11 
Within 30 days, NYPD should provide OIG-NYPD an itemized list of the 
surveillance technologies that it uses. This list should include 
information concerning the functionalities of each technology, so that 
OIG-NYPD can assess whether NYPD has, in fact, issu ed an IUP that 
covers each surveillance technology that has a distinct functionality or 
capability. 
I 
Rec. 
12 
NYPD should create written policies establishing guidelines to specify 
the modifications that can be made to probe images used for Facial 
Recognition Technology. 
I 
Rec. 
14 
To facilitate the OIG -NYPD’s mandated annual audits, beginning 
January 15, 2023, NYPD should provide OIG -NYPD with quarterly 
updates, reflecting newly acquired or discontinued technologies in an 
itemized list of the surveillance technologies that it uses. 
I 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should identify in each IUP each external agency, by name, with 
which the Department can share surveillance data. 
PI 
 
33 On or before February 4, 2026, the Department updated all of the Impact and Use Policies (“IUPs”) moving 
Recommendations 1, 5, and 12 from (R) to (I), Rec. 4 and Rec. 11 from (AIP) to (I), Rec. 2, 3 and 8 from (R) to 
(PI), Rec. 7 and 13 from (R) to (AIP), and Rec. 14 from (UC) to (I). 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
48 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
3 
NYPD should include in each IUP the specific safeguards/restrictions 
on use or dissemination of the surveillance data, for each external 
agency with which the Department can share such data. 
PI 
Rec. 
8 
Within 90 days, in order to facilitate OIG -NYPD’s statutorily obligated 
audit under the POST Act, NYPD should provide OIG -NYPD with 
information indicating, for each surveillance technology, the various 
types of data collected and which NYPD units maintain that 
information. NYPD should include  information about the retention 
procedures and practices for each type of data collected so that OIG -
NYPD can assess NYPD’s compliance with the IUP. 
PI 
Rec. 
7 
Within 180 days, NYPD should create an internal tracking system for 
every instance in which NYPD provides an external agency with data 
collected via surveillance technologies that NYPD controls, including 
the name of the agency and the date of that the data was provided.34 
AIP 
Rec. 
13 
NYPD should conduct periodic audits of its Facial Identification 
Section’s use of facial recognition technology to ensure compliance 
with its policies related to the use of the technology and its data. This 
auditing process should be memorialized in writing.35 
AIP 
Rec. 
15 
NYPD should issue a press release announcing the publication, related 
public comment period of any new IUPs, and subsequently publish the 
press release on its website. 
UC 
Rec. 
6 
Within 180 days, NYPD should convene a working group of NYPD 
personnel, relevant City Council members or their appointees, and 
representatives from select advocacy groups and community 
organizations who have expertise in surveillance technologies. The 
purpose of the working group is to make recommendations to NYPD on 
necessary updates to the existing IUPs and on any information that 
R 
 
34 The POST Act was amended in 2025 to, among other things, require the NYPD to develop an (1) internal 
tracking system to document each instance in which an external entity is provided with data collected by a 
surveillance technology, including the name of t he entity and the data provided.  The Department is working 
internally to develop such systems in compliance with the amended law  and as such, Rec. 7 moves from (R) to 
(AIP). 
35 The POST Act was amended in 2025 to, among other things, require perform audits of the use of FIS’s facial 
recognition technology, the Department has accepted to comply with the amended law.  As such, Rec. 13 moves 
from (R) to (AIP). 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
49 
# Recommendation Status 
should be included in any future IUPs for new technologies, based on 
the group’s expertise. NYPD’s procedures applicable to the working 
group should ensure the protection of sensitive information as 
appropriate. 
Rec. 
9 
NYPD should provide OIG -NYPD with any data access and retention 
policies that are included in the existing contracts with vendors who 
supply the surveillance technologies used by NYPD. 
R 
Rec. 
10 
NYPD should provide OIG -NYPD with the data access and retention 
policies contained in any newly executed contracts with surveillance 
technology vendors by the 15th of each quarter (i.e., January, April, July, 
and October). 
R 
 
  
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
50 
2023 
An Investigation into NYPD’s Criminal Group Database (2023) 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
2 
Within 180 days, NYPD should revise the IUP for the CGD to describe 
the activation, renewal, and deactivation processes, explain the nature 
and extent of the evidence required to satisfy the entry criteria, and 
identify by name the law enforcement and other external entities with 
whom NYPD may share information about the individuals included in 
the CGD, for investigative or other purposes. The document should also 
describe the security protections that prevent unauthorized parties, 
within or outside of NYPD, from accessing the CGD.36 
I 
Rec. 
4 
NYPD should provide written guidance to officers explaining how to 
apply the Option A and B entry criteria, including examples of the type 
and extent of evidence that is sufficient for activation.37 
I 
Rec. 
5 
NYPD should provide written guidance about how to complete the 
Person Maintenance, Activation, and Renewal DD5s for the 
maintenance and entry of individuals into the CGD and should include 
a requirement that available documentation be attached to the DD5s to 
substantiate that entry criteria are satisfied. 
I 
Rec. 
6 
NYPD should create a list of police encounters and arrest types that 
constitute “qualifying police contact,” for purposes of renewal 
determinations, to be used by officers responsible for deciding whether 
to renew or deactivate individuals from the CGD. 
I 
Rec. 
14 
NYPD should not consider sealed arrests when making CGD activation 
and renewal determinations38 
I 
 
36 See updates to CGD IUP issued Feb. 4, 2026, which reflect the recommendations of OIG -NYPD and meet the 
new requirements of the POST Act, as amended. As such, Rec. 2 moved from (PI) to (I). 
37 OIG-NYPD’s review of the NYPD’s Chief of Detectives Memo led to an update in status for Recommendations 
4, 5, and 6 from (PI) to (I).  
38 OIG-NYPD confirmed sealed arrests are not considered for renewal determinations. Additionally, NYPD 
accepts OIG -NYPD’s 2025 recommendation to conduct semi- annual audits to ensure individuals are not 
renewed on arrests that are subsequently sealed moving Rec. 14 from (PI) to (I).  
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
51 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
15 
NYPD should increase the number of staffers assigned to support the 
administration of the CGD.39 
I 
Rec. 
17 
Annually, as requested, NYPD should provide a random sample 
(including minors) of all Activation, Renewal, and Deactivation DD5s 
and any support documentation to OIG-NYPD for review. 
I 
Rec. 
3 
NYPD should require a multilevel review process for the activation, 
renewal, and deactivation of all entries in the CGD, to be supported by 
the signature of each reviewer where required. That process should be 
memorialized in writing. 
PI 
Rec. 
13 
NYPD should ensure that officers completing Person Maintenance, 
Activation, and Renewal forms do not have access to sealed arrest 
information for those purposes, including, but not limited to, ensuring 
that DD5 forms used for those purposes do not autofill  with sealed 
arrest information unless explicitly authorized by law. 
PI 
Rec. 
7 
Within 180 days, NYPD should begin a review of each entry in the CGD 
to determine whether inclusion is still warranted. That analysis should 
be completed by the Department within one year after the publication 
of this Report.40 
PI 
Rec. 
11 
NYPD should notify parents or guardians of minors that their children 
have been activated into the CGD within 60 days of activation unless 
notification would interfere with active criminal investigations. 
AIP 
Rec. 
1 
Within 180 days, NYPD should publish a statement on its website 
describing how the CGD contributes to the Department’s public safety 
and violent crime reduction strategies. The statement should provide 
more detail than what is contained in the publicly ava ilable IUP and it 
should describe how the information in the database supports the 
AIP 
 
39 NYPD has increased the number of staff assigned to support the administration of the CGD, and as such Rec. 
15 is moved from (PI) to (I).  
40 Rec. 7 was updated from (R) moved to ( PI) with the Department’s acceptance of Rec. 9 of the 2025 CGD 
Update report, during which time, confirmation of minors’ renewal or deactivation had already begun to occur. 
Once OIG-NYPD can confirm that this review continues to occur on a periodic basis, the recommendation will 
be moved to (I).  
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
52 
# Recommendation Status 
Department’s efforts to combat violent crime as well as its effectiveness 
as a tool of crime prevention. 
Rec. 
8 
NYPD should require, by written policy, the review of all CGD entries 
every twelve months for minors and every eighteen months for adults. 
R 
Rec. 
9 
NYPD should make inaccessible via DAS and other search methods all 
CGD entries that are not evaluated within 60 days of review deadlines, 
until those entries are reviewed. 
R 
Rec. 
10 
NYPD should require and convene a special review panel of 
Department personnel to approve the activation of minors into the 
CGD, documented by the signature of the chair of the group. 
R 
Rec. 
12 
NYPD should create a process for minors and their parents to appeal 
their inclusions in the database if the minors have no contact with law 
enforcement over a twelve-month period. 
R 
Rec. 
16 
NYPD should create a written policy formalizing its intention, after an 
individualized assessment, to generally grant FOIL requests by 
individuals with respect to whether they are in the CGD, by providing 
them with redacted versions of any relevant support ing documents if 
they are in the database, and by informing them that there are no 
relevant documents, if they are not.
 
R 
 
Overtime Under Review: NYPD Overtime and the Increased Risk of Negative 
Policing Outcomes  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD should develop and incorporate policies related to fatigue in its 
written overtime procedures. 
PI 
Rec. 
3 
NYPD should develop and implement training for officers concerning 
how to recognize and to mitigate the effects of fatigue due to long work 
hours, as NYPD currently provides to supervisors. 
PI 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
53 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should develop a system to track off -duty employment hours 
worked by its officers. 
R 
Rec. 
4 
To further inform its development of overtime and fatigue -related 
policies, NYPD should utilize a consulting firm that specializes in, 
among other things, risk assessments, to calculate the risks and 
benefits of overtime and to identify solutions to mitiga te those risks 
while meeting the Department’s overtime needs. This assessment 
should include an analysis of fatigue-associated risks and overtime shift 
justifications, and the assessment should identify solutions to control 
overtime shift length and distribution. Depending on the results of this 
assessment, NYPD should develop appropriate risk mitigation 
strategies. 
R 
Rec. 
5 
NYPD should make the results of the risk assessment recommended in 
number 4, above, and any recommendations, available on its public 
website in an area that is readily accessible. 
R 
Rec. 
6 
NYPD should codify in its Patrol Guide and/or Administrative Guide 
any changes made as a result of the risk assessment and 
recommendations. If no changes are made, NYPD should issue a 
statement explaining its decision -making on its public website in an 
area that is readily accessible. 
R 
 
Statement of Findings Regarding NYPD’s Technical Assistance and Response 
Unit and the Revised Handschu Guidelines  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD should require in a written policy that TARU notify the Legal 
Bureau of any requests from the Intelligence Bureau for access to TARU 
footage.
 
I 
Rec. 
3 
NYPD should revise Patrol Guide Procedure 212-71 to more accurately 
reflect NYPD’s approach to TARU record retention. If the Department 
intends to continue its indefinite retention of all video/photographic 
materials the policy should clearly state that po sition, and explain the 
purpose of indefinite retention, as well as any other purposes for which 
PI 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
54 
# Recommendation Status 
materials can be retained, and the appropriate length of any such 
retention.41 
Rec. 
6 
NYPD should revise NYPD Patrol Guide Procedure 212 -71 to address 
the circumstances in which TARU can be deployed without the 
requisite preauthorization from NYPD’s Legal Bureau, and in which 
retroactive authorization can be granted.42 
PI 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should require in a written policy that the Legal Bureau process 
any requests from the Intelligence Bureau for access to TARU footage 
in accordance with the Revised Handschu Guidelines. 
AIP 
Rec. 
5 
NYPD should replace the current hard copy logbook and content lists 
which catalogue the video/photographic material collected by TARU 
(its practice since May 2020) with an electronic tracking system that 
would enable more efficient searches for particular footage in TARU’s 
library. 
AIP 
Rec. 
4 
NYPD should create an index/log for the over two decades of 
video/photographic footage that was captured prior to May 2020, 
when the Department began consistently cataloging and indexing such 
footage.
 
R 
Rec. 
7 
NYPD should revise NYPD Patrol Guide Procedure 212 -71 to require 
that TARU request logs identify the specific basis and rationale for 
TARU’s request to be present and record at a public gathering, instead 
of using boilerplate language. 
R 
Rec. 
8 
NYPD should require that TARU request logs specify what types of 
video/photographic technology is sought 
R 
 
41 The revised P.G. 212- 71 clarifies that all video recordings/photographs taken by TARU will be indefinitely 
retained and the purpose for the use of the video recordings are provided.   However, the policy does not 
provide a purpose for indefinite retention.   The "Scope" section indicates purposes for which video and/or 
photographic equipment may be used but not the purpose of indefinitely retaining the resulting materials. As 
such, Rec. 3 is updated from (AIP) to (PI). 
42 The revised P.G. 212- 71 clarifies that there are "exigent circumstances" in which TARU can deploy without 
Legal Bureau pre- authorization. There is no clarity about what circumstances qualify as "exigent." Rec. 6 is 
moved from (AIP) to (PI). 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
55 
2024 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Compliance with the POST Act43 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
NYPD should issue a new individual IUP for Digidog.44 I 
Rec. 
2 
NYPD should amend the addenda to the IUPs applicable to StarChase, 
IDEMIA, and the AR application to meet all of the requirements of the 
POST Act. The GPS Tracking Devices’ IUP should be updated to 
adequately disclose the specialized rules, processes, and guidelines, 
health and safety impacts, and the type of data that may be shared with 
external entities in relation to StarChase; the Digital Fingerprint 
Scanning Devices’ IUP should be updated to adequately address 
policies and procedures related to data retention.45 
I 
Rec. 
4 
For future IUPs, NYPD should group surveillance technologies into 
single IUPs only when the surveillance technologies at issue are 
substantially similar in capability and manner of use, and the IUP 
identifies and specifically names the individual technolog ies to which 
specific information within the IUP applies.46 
I 
Rec. 
5 
NYPD should review its existing IUPs, that “group” multiple 
surveillance technologies to determine if grouping is permissible under 
I 
 
43 These recommendations are related to the May  2024 release of the POST Act Report.  OIG -NYPD agreed to 
consider implementation of recommendations up until February 15, 2026.  Therefore, the February 4, 2026,  
updates to all IUPs are noted and considered. 
44 A new IUP was drafted to comply with the 2025 amendments to the POST Act.  The Remote-Controlled 
Robots: “Tactical Impact and Use Policy”  thereby creates a separate IUP for Digidog and similar technologies.  
As a result, Rec. 1 is moved from (AIP) to (I).  
45 The addendum in the IUP applicable to StarChase, IDEMIA, and the AR application meet the requirements of 
the POST Act as amended moving Rec. 2 from (PI) to (I).   
46 In compliance with the amended POST Act, the updated IUPs consist of surveillance technologies that are 
similar in capabilities and manner of use and as such, Rec. 4 is moved from (AIP) to (I).   
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
56 
# Recommendation Status 
the standard set out in Recommendation 4, and issue new IUPs or 
addenda as appropriate.47 
Rec. 
7 OIG-NYPD continues to maintain, as it did in its 2022 Report, that while 
not a requirement of the POST Act, NYPD should include in each IUP the 
potential disparate impacts of the surveillance technology on protected 
groups (instead of the potential dispara te impacts of the IUP on 
protected groups, as is currently required under the law).48 
I 
Rec. 
6 
While not a requirement of the POST Act, NYPD should update the 
Internal Audit and Oversight sections of its IUPs to include mechanisms 
for tracking and monitoring use of its surveillance technologies to 
ensure that the technologies are being used as descr ibed in the IUPs, 
and that the IUPs do not result in a disparate impact on any protected 
groups. 
R 
Rec. 
3 
In the event that NYPD uses K5 in the future, the Department should 
disclose health and safety information related to the technology within 
the SAC IUP.49 
NLA 
 
  
 
47 In compliance with the amended POST Act, the updated IUPs consist of surveillance technologies that are 
similar in capabilities and manner of use and as such, Rec. 5 is moved from (AIP) to (I).   
48 In compliance with the amended POST Act, which now requires that each IUP list the disparate impact of the 
surveillance technology, and as such, Rec. 7 is moved from (R) to (I).   
49 The Department no longer possesses K5 and has not utilized it since the publication of the 2023 POST Act 
report and while the recommendation was (AIP) the status of Rec. 3 has moved to (NLA) unless the Department 
returns to using the technology. 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
57 
A Review of NYPD’s Community Response Team  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
Update the NYPD website to include information on CRT under the 
Patrol Services Bureau. 
I 
Rec. 
2 
Memorialize a mission statement in writing that includes the aims and 
goals of CRT, including its crime/offense focus, and publish it on NYPD’s 
website. 
I 
Rec. 
3 
Memorialize in the Patrol Guide and/or Administrative Guide policies 
and procedures specific to CRT for the following areas: uniform 
requirements; statistics concerning CRT’s work that will be maintained 
by the Department and the individuals responsible fo r 
recording/maintaining them; recruitment guidelines; the 
requirements for CRT officers in supervisory roles; the training 
required to perform CRT officer duties; and where officers can be 
deployed and how deployment will be determined. 
I 
Rec. 
5 
Conduct a minimum of two inclusive and accessible meetings a year, 
per Patrol Borough Command to gather community sentiments with 
respect to CRT and maintain a detailed agenda and minutes from each 
meeting. 
I 
Rec 
6 
Track and maintain a database for all CRT deployment on a weekly 
basis. 
I 
Rec. 
4 
Collect, analyze, and publish 311-related data, specifically pertaining to 
QoL categories, that fall under the Department’s official QoL definition 
and CRT’s mandate. Analysis should consider changes in 311 -related 
data over time and  be used to inform deployment and enforcement 
decisions. 
UC 
Rec. 
7 
Publish the CRT -specific data that NYPD is already collecting for CRT 
(i.e. arrests, summonses, mopeds, etc.) on the NYPD website. 
R 
 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
58 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Compliance with the POST Act50  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 3 Update the UAS IUP to make clear that the requirement of an FAA 
remote pilot certificate is applicable to all UAS operators, rather than 
only TARU personnel. 
I 
Rec. 4  Update the UAS IUP to include all the capabilities of its UAS fleet. I 
Rec. 5 Update the UAS IUP to include a reference to the Thermographic 
Cameras IUP, which contains additional information relevant to this 
technological capability of UAS. 
I 
Rec. 6 Update the UAS IUP to note that operations involving First -Person 
View drones require a designated visual observer, as per FAA 
guidelines, except if there is an active COA waiving this requirement. 
I 
 
Rec. 8 Update the UAS IUP to reflect that flight log information is automated 
and should be entered directly into FORMS rather than maintained by 
TARU. 
I 
Rec. 9 Update the UAS IUP to disclose health and safety impacts related to 
UAS. 
I 
Rec. 
10 
While not a requirement of the POST Act, update the UAS IUP to 
include the potential disparate impacts of the use and deployment of 
UAS technology itself on protected groups, as NYPD has done for 
certain, but not all, surveillance technologies. 
I 
 
50 These recommendations are related to the December 2024 release of the POST Act Report  in which the 
Department accepted all ten recommendations .  OIG -NYPD agreed to consider implementation of 
recommendations up until February 15, 2026 .  Therefore, the February 4, 2026,  updates to all IUPs are noted 
and considered.  Recommendations 3 -6, and 8 -10 move from (AIP) to (I), and Recommendations 1, 2 and 7 
moved from (AIP) to (PI).  
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
59 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 1 Update the UAS IUP to reflect that TARU personnel are not the only 
ones operating and supervising UAS operations and currently all 
operations are performed independently from TARU.51 
PI 
Rec. 2 Update the UAS IUP to accurately describe the approval, supervision, 
and reporting structure for UAS operations.52 
PI 
Rec. 7 Update the UAS IUP to specify whether TARU is the only unit 
responsible for retaining UAS data, and if not, specify requirements 
applied to those other units.
53 
PI 
  
 
51 The updated IUP i ncluded that TARU personnel are not the only ones operating and supervising UAS ; 
however, d id not include that all operations are performed independently from TARU .  Therefore, Rec. 1 is 
moved from (AIP) to (PI).  
52 The updated IUP describes the approval process ; however, a r eporting structure for UAS operations is not  
detailed.  Therefore, Rec. 2 is moved from (AIP) to (PI).  
53 The updated IUP describes the d ata safeguards and retention policies ; however, there is no reference to 
TARU’s role or other unit’s involvement with UAS data retention, and as such, Rec. 7 moved from (AIP) to (PI).  
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
60 
2025 
An Assessment of NYPD’s Use of Social Media  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
Memorialize in writing an internal review and approval process for 
posts on executive accounts. 
I 
Rec. 
2 
Update all relevant Patrol Guide Procedure and Administrative Guide 
Procedure sections to align with the requirements of the Citywide 
Social Media Policy. 
I 
Rec. 
3 
Review the Citywide Social Media Policy and ensure NYPD complies 
with all of its requirements. 
I 
Rec. 
4 
Update the Department’s social media use policy to include rules and 
guidance about appropriate content and language for posting on official 
Department social media accounts. 
I 
Rec. 
5 
Assign Digital Communications Officers to all social media accounts, 
including at the executive level, to ensure that social media posts are 
consistent with citywide and department policy, and memorialize this 
requirement in writing. 
I 
Rec. 
6 
Provide training to all staff using official agency social media regarding 
the Citywide Social Media Policy, the Department’s social media policy, 
and best practices. 
PI 
 
Update on NYPD’s Implementation of DOI’s 2023 Criminal Group Database 
Recommendations  
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
1 
Ensure that all uniformed personnel authorized to nominate 
individuals into the CGD receive training about the requirements of the 
IUP and the Chief of Detectives Memorandum. 
AIP 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
61 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
2 
Update the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to require the two 
independent reliable sources to provide substantive explanations for 
their reasonable belief of an individual’s criminal group membership 
and to document those explanations on activation DD5s. 
AIP 
Rec. 
3 
Update the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to clarify that the 
two independent sources should be different from the reporting officer. 
AIP 
Rec. 
4 
Update the IUP to mirror the detailed guidelines included within the 
Chief of Detectives Memorandum 
AIP 
Rec. 
5 
Update the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to reflect a 
multilevel review process for renewals and ensure that a supervisor 
reviews and signs off on all renewal DD5s, as previously recommended 
and accepted by the Department, and list the required su pporting 
documentation.
 
AIP 
Rec. 
6 
Update the IUP to require the nominating detective to notify the 
juvenile’s parent or guardian within 60-days of activation into the CGD. 
AIP 
Rec. 
7 
Update the IUP and Chief of Detectives Memorandum to ensure that 
renewal and activation DD5s include a required field containing the 
individual’s next review date. 
AIP 
Rec. 
8 
Create, and memorialize in writing, an internal audit requirement to 
ensure that notifications to parents of minors added to the database are 
made, that the associated Notification DD5s are completed, and that the 
notification appears within a new column in the database as required 
by the Chief of Detectives Memorandum.
 
AIP 
Rec. 
9 
Confirm whether any individual activated at age 16 or 17 has been in 
the database for over two years without a review, due to the coding 
error identified above and review any such individual to determine 
whether they should be renewed into the database or deactivated. 
AIP 
Rec. 
10 
Ensure that supporting documentation is included for all renewals. AIP 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
62 
# Recommendation Status 
Rec. 
11 
Conduct quarterly audits to ensure that there are no past due entries 
for review, and if there are, renew or deactivate them immediately. 
AIP 
Rec. 
12 
Review individuals renewed based on an arrest every six months to 
ensure that renewals are not based on arrests that are subsequently 
sealed. NYPD should at minimum explore whether it is feasible to audit 
renewals for this purpose. 
AIP 
Rec. 
13 
Collect, analyze, and publish data concerning the number of entries 
added, renewed, and deactivated from the database annually. 
AIP 
 
 
 
 
Appendix  Office of the Inspector General for the NYPD 
63 
 
 
Fighting Corruption in New York City Since 1873 
