TITLE: Risky Business
URL: https://cbcny.org/research/risky-business-0
ISSUED: 2026-01-28
PDF: https://cbcny.org/sites/default/files/media/files/CBCREPORT_Risky-Biz-Taxes_01282026_1.pdf

REPORT  TAXES
Risky Business
New York Corporate Taxes Highest in Nation
Press Release
Download Report
Print
Share
EXPAND TABLE OF CONTENTS
January 28, 2026
Contents
Executive Summary
Introduction
NYC Businesses Face the Nation’s Highest Marginal Corporate Tax Rate
Proposed Tax Increase Would Drive Combined New York City Business Tax Rate to Nearly Double New Jersey
Business Tax Collections Were Nearly $20 Billion in FY 2025
Rate Increase Can Affect Business Competitiveness
New York’s Business Climate is Already Challenging and Costly
Conclusion and Recommendations
Appendix
Executive Summary

To fund a wide array of new and expanded programs and mitigate the impacts of federal policy changes, some advocates and elected officials have called to increase New York’s taxes. One proposal would raise the State top corporate tax rate from 7.25 percent to 11.50 percent, to match New Jersey’s top rate.1 However, businesses in New York City already face a higher top rate than New Jersey—17.44 percent—because they pay not only a State corporate tax, but also a NYC corporate tax and an MTA corporate tax surcharge.

To evaluate tax or spending proposals, policy makers and the public should consider current conditions and assess how changes would affect current and future New Yorkers. This includes examining impacts on the State’s economy and considering whether alternative management or policy reforms could achieve the same goals more effectively. 

CBC’s examination of business tax policies and revenues found that:

New York City businesses face a top combined corporate tax rate of 17.44 percent—the highest in the nation—consisting of State, City, and MTA region taxes;2  
Raising New York State’s top rate to match New Jersey would increase the combined rate in New York City to 22.48 percent, nearly double New Jersey’s 11.50 percent;
The competitiveness impact of a corporate tax rate increase is partially mitigated by New York’s tax structure, which determines taxes based primarily on where customers are located, rather than where a firm is located;3 
Nonetheless, higher corporate taxes put pressure on business margins, prices, and employment and can impact business decisions;
Tax increases can influence decisions about where businesses form, relocate, or expand, and raise the cost of serving New York customers;4 
In fiscal year 2025, statewide business tax collections totaled $19.7 billion, including $6.8 billion from the State corporate franchise tax, $1.9 billion from the MTA surcharge, $7.4 billion from City corporate taxes, and $3.6 billion from the City unincorporated business tax;5 
Businesses also pay the Payroll Mobility Tax, which the State increased twice in the past three years to provide $2.5 billion more to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority;6  
New York’s taxes and regulations make it a challenging business environment, with recent studies ranking New York as:
The 10th worst state to start a small business;
The 3rd slowest in average growth in small businesses;
The 9th most expensive for small business operating costs; and
The 2nd most regulated state based on a review of the State codes, rules, and regulations.7 
 

New York faces significant challenges related to affordability, service quality, and quality of life. Federal cuts further threaten the State’s safety net, services, and budget stability. New York State and its localities are already among the nation’s highest taxers and spenders;  alternative strategies could meet New York’s current needs. In Smart Choices, Better Future for New Yorkers Statewide, CBC recommended a series of actions to address New York’s affordability challenges, domestic outmigration, precarious budget, and competitiveness for business and jobs, including that the State:

Hold the line on taxes;
Review and reduce burdensome regulations that do not serve New Yorkers’ interests;
Curb the $5 billion in economic development tax breaks, capital spending, and programs that fail to deliver results; 
Shift funding from lower-impact programs to affordability and other priority needs; and
Drive service quality and efficiency improvements with performance data, accountability, and targeted programs.

No question: New York benefits from world-class human capital and a dynamic, innovative economy. But firms need to choose to do business, locate, or expand here. Business owners will weigh the critical nature of the New York market against the high taxes, exorbitant business costs, and regulatory complexity. 
Increasing corporate taxes would risk New York’s competitiveness and signal that the State is less welcoming to business.

Introduction

To fund a wide array of new and expanded programs and mitigate the impacts of federal policy changes, some advocates and elected officials have called to increase New York’s taxes. One proposal is to increase the State’s top corporate tax rate from 7.25 percent to 11.50 percent, to match the top rate in New Jersey.8 

The proposal rests on two basic premises: first, that New York State’s corporate rate is relatively low; and second, that it can be raised without economic harm. 

These overlook the fact that businesses in New York City already face the highest combined corporate tax rate in the country—a top marginal rate of 17.44 percent.9 The proposed increase would raise the top marginal rate to nearly double what firms pay in New Jersey. 

Although New York’s tax structure partially mitigates the competitive disadvantage of a high rate, the overall burden can squeeze margins and influence business decisions related to location, expansion, and hiring. 

Moreover, raising taxes would send a negative signal to businesses already contending with high costs and significant regulatory burdens. At a time when New York should prioritize job growth and living wages, policymakers should take action to encourage businesses to form, grow, sell, invest, and hire in the state. Raising corporate taxes sends the opposite message.

NYC Businesses Face the Nation’s Highest Marginal Corporate Tax Rate—17.44 Percent

The 17.44 percent combined marginal corporate franchise tax rate for business activity in New York City is the highest in the nation.10 (See Figure 1.) This comprises New York State’s corporate franchise tax (CFT), the surcharge levied on businesses within the MTA 12-county region, and New York City’s business corporation tax (BCT). The combined rate is slightly lower than the total of the three rates since City corporate taxes are deductible from taxable State income.

In the MTA 12-county region, but outside of New York City, the combined marginal rate is 9.425 percent.11 This is higher than all competitor states except for New Jersey (11.500 percent) and Illinois (9.500 percent). 

New York State’s CFT rate of 7.25 percent is lower than most competitors’ rates.12 New Jersey is 11.50 percent, California is 8.84 percent, and Massachusetts is 8.00 percent. However, this only applies to business activity outside of the 12-county MTA region, estimated to be around one-fifth of the Statewide taxable total.13 

Proposed Tax Increase Would Drive Combined New York City Business Tax Rate to Nearly Double New Jersey

Matching New Jersey’s top rate would increase New York’s rate 4.25 percentage points, or 59 percent. This would balloon the top combined marginal rate paid in New York City to 22.48 percent, nearly double the rate in New Jersey. (See Figure 2.) It would increase the top tax rate on businesses activity in the MTA region outside of New York City to 13.63 percent, leapfrogging New Jersey’s rate. 

Business Tax Collections Were Nearly $20 Billion in FY 2025

In State fiscal year 2025, New York State collected $6.8 billion through the CFT and another $1.9 billion through the MTA surcharge.14 In City fiscal year 2025, New York City collected $7.4 billion through the business corporation/general corporation taxes and $3.6 billion through the unincorporated business tax.15

Rate Increase Can Affect Business Competitiveness

Increasing corporate tax rates in New York, already a costly and complex business environment, could weaken the State’s and City’s economic competitiveness and send a troubling signal to businesses. Tax increases can increase consumer costs, stifle economic growth, and make New York City a less attractive consumer market.  

This increase would be on top of recent transit-related business tax increases—the State increased the payroll mobility tax (PMT) in 2023 and 2025 to provide additional funding for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority. Those increases were substantial: Total PMT collections more than doubled, from $1.8 billion in 2022 to $4.7 billion in 2026.16

Although New York’s tax structure partly mitigates the competitive disadvantage of high rates, an increase still will affect some business behavior. For the NYS CFT, market-based sourcing used to allocate business income to New York is based on the location of the customer receiving the services or goods, regardless of whether the employee or business facility is in New York.17 That means that moving employees or headquarters does not necessarily reduce corporate taxes.

Nonetheless, the simple truth is that the projected $4 billion cost of the increase in the NYS CFT, paid mainly by large, multi-jurisdictional corporations in finance, insurance, trade, and professional and business services, would be passed along or absorbed somewhere. (See Appendix A: Business Tax Basics for more details.)  

It is unlikely that a business would simply cover the cost of higher taxes through lower profits, decreased distribution to shareholders, less research and development, or capital investment.18 Businesses often pass some of the cost of tax increases to their customers—higher taxes could lead to higher costs for New Yorkers.19 Alternatively, businesses could slow expansion or growth, or locate outside of New York, dampening hiring and investment.20

Firms may choose to shrink, or at least not grow, their presence in New York to avoid New York’s high cost of doing business and extensive regulatory environment. New businesses may also opt to structure as S corps or unincorporated businesses to minimize exposure to corporate taxes.21 This is especially true for businesses in New York City that already face a 17.44 percent combined rate and may be particularly sensitive to further increases.  

If possible, businesses outside of New York may choose to focus on serving other, less costly markets. While New York’s broad and large economy and consumer base make it an attractive market, the growth of diverse industries in other parts of the country may increasingly present a challenge.

New York’s Business Climate is Already Challenging and Costly

Corporate taxes are not incurred in a vacuum. They are part of a broader business climate that includes costs, regulations, availability and quality of human capital, and proximity to related industries and firms.

New York has many economic advantages. It attracts highly skilled human capital, offers world-class cultural amenities, and draws a diverse population across skill levels. Its long-standing role as a center of creativity and innovation, combined with dense networks of interrelated firms and strong access to capital markets, further strengthens its economy. Nonetheless, it faces growing competition in these areas.

Conversely, New York is the number one taxing jurisdiction in the country. The State and its localities collected the most taxes per capita and per $1,000 of personal income in 2022—eclipsing California, the second-ranked state, by more than 20 percent.22 The Tax Foundation ranks New York 50th on its State Tax Competitiveness Index.23  

New York businesses also face high costs:

A recent analysis ranked New York as the 10th worst state to start a small business and 3rd slowest in average growth of small businesses;  
Another study ranked New York State as the 9th most expensive for small business operating costs;  
Insurance premiums are 15 percent higher than the national average;
Litigation and claim costs per household are the second highest in the nation and 67 percent above the national average; and
Commercial per kilowatt hour electricity costs are 47 percent higher than the national average.24  

New York also has complex regulatory systems that increase compliance costs, as evidenced by:

The Governor’s directive to identify regulatory reforms to “alleviate the regulatory burdens we impose” in the fiscal year 2027 budget call letter to agencies;
Business owners’ number one answer for how to improve New York’s business climate is reducing state and local regulations; and
Ranking New York as the 2nd most regulated state based on a review of the State codes, rules, and regulations.25
Conclusion and Recommendations

New York faces significant challenges related to affordability, service quality, and quality of life. Federal cuts further threaten the State’s safety net, services, and budget stability. Nevertheless, given that New York State and its localities are the nation’s highest taxers and 3rd highest spenders, and that alternative strategies could meet New York’s current needs at this time, CBC recommended the State:

Hold the line on taxes;
Review and reduce burdensome regulations that do not serve New Yorkers’ interests;
Curb the $5 billion in economic development tax breaks and programs that fail to deliver results;  
Shift funding from lower-impact programs to affordability and other priority needs; and
Drive service quality and efficiency improvements with performance data, accountability, and targeted programs.26

New York benefits from world-class human capital and a vibrant and innovative economy. But firms doing business or choosing to locate here—essential to growing the economy—weigh those benefits against high taxes, exorbitant costs, and complex regulations. Increasing corporate taxes would risk the State’s economic competitiveness and signal that New York is less welcoming to business. 

By Ana Champeny

Vice President for Research

By Sean Campion

Director of Housing and Economic Development Studies
Download Report
Risky Business: New York Corporate Taxes Highest in Nation (1.2 MB)
Appendix
Business Tax Basics

Corporate income taxes, also referred to as business income taxes and corporate franchise taxes, are levied on eligible corporations that have business activity within a jurisdiction—city, county, state, or nation. 

Determining which companies are subject to corporate taxes usually begins with federal tax rules. Under those rules, incorporated businesses (C-corps) are subject to the corporate tax unless they elect to file as S-corps, which are incorporated companies choosing to pay federal tax liability through the personal income tax filings of their shareholders.27 For State and local corporate taxes, S-corps may be subject to corporate income taxes, personal income taxes, or both. 

Unincorporated businesses, such as partnerships and sole proprietorship do not pay corporate taxes; their tax liability is generally calculated through the personal income tax liability of their members or partners. 

Corporations must then determine whether they have nexus with various taxing jurisdictions. Nexus means the company has a significant enough presence, whether physical or economic, in the jurisdiction to be subject to its tax laws.

If a company has nexus with a state or local taxing jurisdiction, it must calculate how much of its net income (income minus expenses) is subject to that jurisdiction’s tax. This process is called sourcing or allocation. Each taxing entity has its own rules about sourcing business activity, but typically allocation is based on one or more of the following factors: 

Service location, or the delivery of goods or services within the jurisdiction;
Employment within the jurisdiction; and/or
Real estate and capital holdings in the jurisdiction.  

Not all business activity allocated to a local jurisdiction may ultimately be taxable. There are various tax credits and incentive programs that can reduce or eliminate tax liability. 

Once the amount of taxable business activity is determined, the tax rate is applied. In some states, like New York, corporate tax liabilities are calculated under multiple methods, and the firm owes the highest tax.

Business Taxes in New York

New York has multiple business taxes based on geography. (See Appendix Table 1.) The State levies a statewide CFT and an MTA surcharge for activity within the 12-county Metropolitan Commuter Transportation District.28 New York City has a business corporation tax, a general corporation tax, and an unincorporated business tax that apply to business activity in the City.29

Economic Nexus

Businesses then determine if they have nexus with New York, meaning a significant enough relationship to subject the corporation to New York’s tax regime.30 Typically, nexus is determined by sales activity within a jurisdiction, though employment and business presence can be factors as well. 

Sourcing

Once nexus is established, business activity in New York is allocated geographically based on a single sales factor—where the good or service is sold, provided, or delivered.31 Under market sourcing, the location of the customer determines the sourcing—accounting services provided in New York to a Connecticut-based client are allocated to Connecticut, not New York. Under cost of performance sourcing, the location of the service determines sourcing—the accounting service would be allocated to New York not Connecticut. 

The New York State CFT, the MTA surcharge, and the NYC BCT use market-based sourcing. The NYC GCT and UBT use cost of performance sourcing. 

Corporate Structure

C-corps pay the NYS corporate franchise tax on income allocated to New York State, with a top rate of 7.25 percent. They also pay a 30 percent tax surcharge on NYS CFT allocated to the 12-county MTA region.32  

Federal S-corps must elect NYS S-corp status. If a federally elected S-corp does not elect NYS S-corp status, it pays the NYS corporate franchise tax and the MTA surcharge as a C-corp. If it elects NYS S-corp status, it pays a fixed dollar minimum, which ranges from $25 to $4,500. NYS S-corps are not subject to the MTA-region surcharge.33  

NYC taxes C-corps under the BCT and S-corps under the GCT. There are modest differences in allocation and tax calculation, but the top marginal rate is 8.85 percent of income, except for major financial institutions which have a 9.00 percent rate.34  

Unincorporated businesses do not pay any New York State business taxes. NYC unincorporated businesses pay the City’s unincorporated business tax of 4 percent of taxable net income allocated to New York City.35   

Who Pays Business Taxes in New York

The types of firms paying business taxes in New York will differ based on firm size, sector, corporate structure and whether fully NY-based or multi-jurisdictional. 

New York State and New York City release limited information on corporate taxpayers. According to the most recent data available, for tax year 2021, CBC finds that:

Roughly 319,000 C-corps had $5.9 billion in NYS corporate franchise tax liability;
Just 736 taxpayers (0.2 percent) paid $4.4 billion in taxes (74.9 percent);
Nearly 80 percent of taxpayers paid $1,000 or less;
Just over 185,000 C-corps had $4.0 billion in NYC business corporation tax liability;
The top 10 percent of taxpayers paid 99 percent of the liability;
Multi-jurisdictional firms paid 94 percent of the liability ($3.8 billion);
More than 450,000 S-corps, which pay the required minimum tax at the State level, paid a total of $134.9 million (an average of $295 per taxpayer);36 
170,000 S-corps, which are taxed like C-corps by New York City, paid $1.5 billion in NYC general corporation tax (an average of $8,831);
The top 10 percent of taxpayers paid 87 percent of the liability;
Fully NYC-based S-corps paid 56 percent of the liability, while multi-jurisdictional firms paid the remaining 44 percent; and
Finance and insurance firms pay 40 percent of all business taxes in the City, nearly $3.2 billion, followed by professional, technical, and managerial service firms that pay 11 percent ($854 million).

Corporate structure differs among sectors, leading to different exposure to corporate business taxes. CBC’s review of New York City business taxes found that:

C-corps pay the majority of City business tax liability in the finance and insurance, information, and wholesale and retail trade sectors; 
Real estate and other services firms pay substantial business tax liabilities as S-corps, with smaller liability shares paid by C-corps and partnerships; 
Many legal firms pay business taxes as unincorporated businesses, which means they don’t pay corporate taxes and only pay unincorporated business taxes in the City; and 
Professional, technical, and managerial service firm business tax liability is split fairly evenly across the three corporate structures. 
Table 1: NYS and NYC Business Taxes
Notes

* Includes federal S-corps that do not qualify as NYS S-corps
** Sales of tangible personal property are based on delivery location
***MTA region includes New York City (Bronx, Kings, New York, Queens, and Richmond) as well as Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Putnam, Rockland, Orange, and Dutchess counties.
**** Fixed dollar minimum graduated schedule based on receipts.

Top of the Charts 3
New York and its Localities are #1 in Taxing, #3 in Spending
The Hidden Cost of New York’s Shrinking Millionaire Share
Smart Choices, Better Future for New Yorkers Statewide
Footnotes
New York State and City corporate tax rates vary based on business type, sector, and income level and are described in detail in Appendix 1. New Jersey’s top rate is a combination of a top rate of 9.0 percent plus a temporary 2.5 percent surcharge on businesses with income over $10 million that is effective in tax years 2024 through 2028. Austin Jefferson, What are Mamdani’s plans to tax the rich?” City & State (September 24, 2025),https://www.cityandstateny.com/policy/2025/09/what-are-mamdanis-plans-tax-rich/408352/Grace Lee, New Jersey Passes Highest Corporate Tax Rate in U.S., (WilkinGuttenplan, CPAs & Advisors, July 15, 2024), https://www.wgcpas.com/new-jersey-passes-highest-corporate-tax-rate-in-us/.
New York City corporate tax payments are deductible from New York State corporate tax, thereby reducing the effective tax rate for the State and MTA-region for NYC businesses. The combined rate is 8.85 percent in New York City, 6.61 percent in New York State (7.25 percent on 91.15 percent subject to the tax, which is 100 percent less the 8.85 percent New York City tax) and 1.98 percent in the MTA region (30 percent surcharge on the 6.61 effective rate in New York State). State of New York, Department of Taxation and Finance, “Article 9-A—Franchise tax on general business corporations” (accessed January 5, 2026), https://www.tax.ny.gov/bus/ct/article9a.htm, and CT-3-M: General Business Corporation MTA Surcharge Return (2024); and City of New York, Department of Finance, “Business corporation tax” (accessed August 22, 2025), https://www.nyc.gov/site/finance/business/business-corporation-tax.page.
Francesco Brindisi, Recent Trends in the City’s Business Income Taxes (Office of the New York City Comptroller, February 18, 2025), https://comptroller.nyc.gov/reports/recent-trends-in-the-citys-business-income-taxes/.
James Cloyne, Ezgi Kurt, and Paolo Surico, Who Gains from Corporate Tax Cuts? (NBER Working Paper 31278, May 2023), https://www.nber.org/papers/w31278; Juan Carlos Suarez Serrato and Owen M. Zidar, Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax Cuts? A Local Labor Market Approach with Heterogenous Firms: Further Results (NBER Working Paper 31206, May 2023), https://www.nber.org/papers/w31206; Scott R. Baker, Stephen Teng Sun, and Constantine Yannelis, Corporate Taxes and Retail Prices (NBER Working Paper 27058, March 2023), https://www.nber.org/papers/w27058; Xavier Giroud and Joshua Rauh, State Taxation and the Reallocation of Business Activity: Evidence from Establishment-Level Data (NBER Working Paper 21534, September 2015), https://www.nber.org/papers/w21534; Alexander Ljungqvist and Michael Smolyasnky, To Cut or Not to Cut? On the Impact of Corporate Taxes on Employment and Income (NBER Working Paper 20753, October 2018),  https://www.nber.org/papers/w20753; and James R. Hines Jr., Corporate Taxation and the Distribution of Income (NBER Working Paper 27939, October 2020), https://www.nber.org/papers/w27939.
State of New York, Department of Taxation and Finance, “Fiscal year tax collections: 2024-2025: Table 5” (accessed January 12, 2026), https://www.tax.ny.gov/research/collections/fy_collections_stat_report/2024-2025-annual-statistical-reports.htm; and Office of the New York City Comptroller, Annual Comprehensive Financial Report for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2025 (October 31, 2025), https://comptroller.nyc.gov/wp-content/uploads/2025/11/ACFR-2025.pdf.
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, MTA 2026 Final Proposed Budget February Financial Plan November Financial Plan 2026 – 2029 (November 2025), and 2023 to 2025 editions,  https://www.mta.info/transparency/financial-information/financial-and-budget-statements.
Adam McCann, “Best and Worst States to Start a Business (2026)”, WalletHub (January 20, 2025), https://wallethub.com/edu/best-states-to-start-a-business/36934; Chris Boyle, “New Data Reveals New York As The 9th Most Expensive State in the US for Small Businesses,” Long Island News (January 6, 2025), https://www.longisland.com/news/01-05-26/new-data-reveals-new-york-as-the-9th-most-expensive-state-in-the-us.html; and Dustin Chambers and Patrick McLaughlin, “New York’s Regulatory Landscape” (Mercatus Center, August 6, 2024), https://www.mercatus.org/regsnapshots24/newyork.
Austin Jefferson, “What are Mamdani’s plans to tax the rich?”City & State (September 24, 2025), https://www.cityandstateny.com/policy/2025/09/what-are-mamdanis-plans-tax-rich/408352/.
State of New York, Department of Taxation and Finance, “Article 9-A—Franchise tax on general business corporations” (accessed January 5, 2026), https://www.tax.ny.gov/bus/ct/article9a.htm, and CT-3-M: General Business Corporation MTA Surcharge Return (2024); and City of New York, Department of Finance, “Business corporation tax” (accessed August 22, 2025), https://www.nyc.gov/site/finance/business/business-corporation-tax.page.
Because local corporate taxes paid to New York City are deducted from taxable receipts when calculating the New York State and MTA liability, the effective State and MTA rates are modestly lower: 6.61 percent and 1.98 percent, respectively.
State of New York, Department of Taxation and Finance, CT-3-M: General Business Corporation MTA Surcharge Return (2024).
State of New York, Department of Taxation and Finance, “Definitions for Article 9-A corporations” (accessed August 22, 2025), https://www.tax.ny.gov/bus/ct/def_art9a.htm#eni.
 The 12-county MTA region, called the Metropolitan Commuter Transportation District (MCTD) includes the five counties in New York City (Bronx, Kings, New York, Queens, and Richmond) as well as Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Putnam, Rockland, Orange, and Dutchess. Based on a review of NYS CFT and MTA surcharge collections for fiscal years 2021 to 2025, the implied share of business activity that is within the MTA region is between 77 percent and 93 percent.  CBC staff analysis of State of New York, Department of Taxation and Finance, “Fiscal year tax collections: 2024-2025: Tables 5 and 20” (accessed January 12, 2026), https://www.tax.ny.gov/research/collections/fy_collections_stat_report/2024-2025-annual-statistical-reports.htm.
State of New York, Department of Taxation and Finance, “Fiscal year tax collections: 2024-2025: Tables 5 and 24” (accessed January 12, 2026), https://www.tax.ny.gov/research/collections/fy_collections_stat_report/2024-2025-annual-statistical-reports.htm.
Office of the New York City Comptroller, Annual Comprehensive Financial Report for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2025 (October 31, 2025), https://comptroller.nyc.gov/wp-content/uploads/2025/11/ACFR-2025.pdf.
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, MTA 2026 Final Proposed Budget February Financial Plan November Financial Plan 2026 – 2029 (November 2025), and 2023 to 2025 editions, https://www.mta.info/transparency/financial-information/financial-and-budget-statements.
State of New York, Department of Taxation and Finance, “Corporate Tax Reform” (accessed January 12, 2026, https://www.tax.ny.gov/bus/ct/corp_tax_reform.htm.
James Cloyne, Ezgi Kurt, and Paolo Surico, Who Gains from Corporate Tax Cuts? (NBER Working Paper 31278, May 2023), https://www.nber.org/papers/w31278; and Juan Carlos Suarez Serrato and Owen M. Zidar, Who Benefits from State Corporate Tax Cuts? A Local Labor Market Approach with Heterogenous Firms: Further Results (NBER Working Paper 31206, May 2023), https://www.nber.org/papers/w31206.
Scott R. Baker, Stephen Teng Sun, and Constantine Yannelis, Corporate Taxes and Retail Prices (NBER Working Paper 27058, March 2023), https://www.nber.org/papers/w27058.
Xavier Giroud and Joshua Rauh, State Taxation and the Reallocation of Business Activity: Evidence from Establishment-Level Data (NBER Working Paper 21534, September 2015),  https://www.nber.org/papers/w21534; and Alexander Ljungqvist and Michael Smolyasnky, To Cut or Not to Cut? On the Impact of Corporate Taxes on Employment and Income (NBER Working Paper 20753, October 2018),  https://www.nber.org/papers/w20753.
James R. Hines Jr., Corporate Taxation and the Distribution of Income (NBER Working Paper 27939, October 2020), https://www.nber.org/papers/w27939.
NYS and its local governments collect 23 percent more taxes than California per capita and 26 percent more per $1,000 of personal income. Ciampaglio, Adam, New York, Still Top of the Charts (Citizens Budget Commission, January 9, 2025), https://cbcny.org/sites/default/files/media/files/CBC_Top-Charts_Chartbook-v2025_1.pdf.
Businesses in New York pay taxes other than the corporate franchise tax, including sales taxes, property taxes, payroll taxes, real-estate transaction taxes, among others. Tax Foundation, “2026 State Tax Competitiveness Index” (accessed January 6, 2026), https://taxfoundation.org/statetaxindex/.
Adam McCann, “Best and Worst States to Start a Business (2026)”, WalletHub (January 20, 2025), https://wallethub.com/edu/best-states-to-start-a-business/36934; Chris Boyle, “New Data Reveals New York As The 9th Most Expensive State in the US for Small Businesses,” Long Island News (January 6, 2025), https://www.longisland.com/news/01-05-26/new-data-reveals-new-york-as-the-9th-most-expensive-state-in-the-us.html; Partnership for New York City, Excessive Litigation is Driving New York’s Affordability Crisis (September 2025), https://pfnyc.org/research/excessive-litigation-is-driving-new-yorks-affordability-crisis; and U.S. Energy Information Administration, “Electricity: Data” (accessed January 6, 2026), https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data.php.
Blake Washington, “Fiscal Year 2027 Call Letter” (State of New York, Division of the Budget, October 9, 2025), https://www.budget.ny.gov/guide/brm/fy27-call-letter.pdf; The Public Policy Institute of New York, Blueprint for New York – Creating a Roadmap for Change” (prepared by Economic Leadership LLC, September 2025), https://www.ppinys.org/blueprint-new-york-creating-roadmap-change; and Dustin Chambers and Patrick McLaughlin, “New York’s Regulatory Landscape” (Mercatus Center, August 6, 2024), https://www.mercatus.org/regsnapshots24/newyork.
For more details on these recommendations, see: Ana Champeny, Smart Choices, Better Future for New Yorkers Statewide (Citizens Budget Commission, December 3, 2025), https://cbcny.org/research/smart-choices-better-future-new-yorkers-statewide.
U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, “S corporations” (accessed 1/5/2026), https://www.irs.gov/businesses/small-businesses-self-employed/s-corporations.
The 12-county MTA region, called the Metropolitan Commuter Transportation District (MCTD) includes the five counties in New York City (Bronx, Kings, New York, Queens, and Richmond) as well as Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Putnam, Rockland, Orange, and Dutchess. State of New York, Department of Taxation and Finance, CT-3-M: General Business Corporation MTA Surcharge Return (2024),
City of New York, Department of Finance, “Business corporation tax” (accessed August 22, 2025), https://www.nyc.gov/site/finance/business/business-corporation-tax.page.
State of New York, Department of Taxation and Finance, “Deriving receipts for Article 9-A tax and MTA surcharge,” (accessed January 12, 2026), https://www.tax.ny.gov/bus/ct/article9a_deriving_receipts.htm.
Between 2009 and 2018, New York State and New York City have transitioned to a single-sales factor allocation, whereby business activity is taxed based on where the activity occurred. This shift replaced a three-factor allocation that used location, employment, and capital assets. See: State of New York, Department of Taxation and Finance, “Corporate Tax Reform” (accessed January 5, 2026), https://www.tax.ny.gov/bus/ct/corp_tax_reform.htm; City of New York, Department of Finance, “Business corporation tax,” (accessed January 5, 2026), https://www.nyc.gov/site/finance/business/business-corporation-tax.page; and Francesco Brindisi, Recent Trends in the City’s Business Income Taxes (Office of the New York City Comptroller, February 18, 2025), https://comptroller.nyc.gov/reports/recent-trends-in-the-citys-business-income-taxes/.
State of New York, Department of Taxation and Finance, “Article 9-A—Franchise tax on general business corporations” (accessed January 5, 2026), https://www.tax.ny.gov/bus/ct/article9a.htm.
State of New York, Department of Taxation and Finance, “ Article 9-A─Franchise tax on S corporations” (accessed January 5, 2026), https://www.tax.ny.gov/bus/ct/s_corporations_post.htm.
For detailed description of New York City business taxes, see: Francesco Brindisi, Recent Trends in the City’s Business Income Taxes (Office of the New York City Comptroller, February 18, 2025), https://comptroller.nyc.gov/reports/recent-trends-in-the-citys-business-income-taxes/.
City of New York, Department of Finance, “Unincorporated Business tax (UBT)” (accessed January 5, 2026), https://www.nyc.gov/site/finance/business/business-unincorporated-business-tax-ubt.page.
State of New York, Department of Taxation and Finance, “Corporate Taxes” (accessed January 12, 2026), https://www.tax.ny.gov/data/stats/taxfacts/corporation-tax.htm.