more 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
NADIA I. SHIHATA 
COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE Release #13-2026 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 17, 2026 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
    
DOI ISSUES 2025 ANTI-CORRUPTION REPORT FOCUSED ON CORRUPTION RISKS 
ASSOCIATED WITH CITY AGENCIES’ INTERNAL AUDITING CAPACITIES 
 
Nadia I. Shihata, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Investigation (“DOI”), issued 
the 2025 Annual Anti-Corruption Report on the internal auditing capacities of City agencies . Government 
auditing provides accountability to the public, ensures that public resources and services are being used 
effectively and ethically, and reduces the risk of corruption. Internal auditing plays a vital role in 
complementing the work that DOI undertakes to combat corruption and auditors’ recommendations provide 
opportunities for improvement within government. DOI recommends that City agencies conduct audits on 
a consistent basis. The results from the questionnaire showed that City agencies use different strategies to 
conduct audits and have varying levels of internal audit capacity. Most agencies reported having at least 
some staff dedicated to performing internal audits, and that their auditors issue written report s and make 
recommendations as a result of their audits. The Report demonstrates that many City agencies have robust 
internal auditing capacities and that many agencies lack an internal audit plan and, in some cases, do not 
issue written reports or do not have any staff conducting audits.  DOI also encourages City agencies to 
review their existing auditing frameworks with an aim towards maximizing auditing capacities in a manner 
that aligns with an agency’s overall capacity and specific mission. 
 
This Report relies on City agencies’ responses to the questionnaire DOI developed and covers the 
period of October 1, 2024, to September 30, 2025. The 50 agencies that responded to the questionnaire 
are listed in the Report, which is attached to this release and can be found at this link: DOI Public Reports 
 
DOI Commissioner Nadia I. Shihata said, “Auditing is a  cornerstone of good government –  
providing accountability to the public as well as assurances that taxpayer resources are being used 
effectively and with integrity. DOI’s Report shows that City agencies indicate they use different strategies 
to conduct audits and that most agencies report having at least some staff dedicated to performing these 
important examinations. As the City grapples with budgetary challenges, audits remain a fundamental anti-
corruption tool, identifying potential red flags that might lead to inefficiencies or more serious failures.”  
 
DOI’s Annual Anti-Corruption Report is mandated by Executive Order 105 (“EO 105”) , which 
consolidated the Inspector General function within DOI and established the DOI Commissioner as the City’s 
independent Inspector General. EO105 also gave agency heads primary responsibility for maintaining 
corruption-free agencies, and called upon D OI to assist in their efforts by preparing this annual Report, 
which summarizes agency -identified corruption vulnerabilities and agencies’ remedial strategies. Since 
2020, these annual reports have focused on City agencies’ responses to a corruption-related issue. Unlike 
other DOI Reports, these annual reports rely primarily on information and analysis supplied to DOI by City 
agencies, rather than DOI’s own investigative work. 
 
To evaluate the auditing capacity at City agencies , DOI’s questionnaire focused on agency staff 
who perform internal audit functions, recruitment or retention challenges that agencies face with respect to 
hiring and retaining auditors, the types of audits that agencies are performing and whether they have 

2 
 
internal audit plans, the subject matter of internal a udits initiated or completed during the reporting period, 
and the extent to which agencies have procured external audits. 
 
Findings based on the questionnaire included: 
 
• A majority of agencies, 70 percent, reported having staff who perform internal audit 
functions, while 30 percent reported that they do not have such staff. 
 Seventeen agencies reported a lower number of active staffers than budgeted 
headcount. 
 The nine agencies that reported a decrease in budgeted headcount for staff 
performing internal audit functions between January 2022 and September 2025, 
cited attrition, vacancy reductions or extended vacancies, and Citywide budget 
reductions, among other reasons. For those agencies reporting a decrease in 
active headcount for that same period, agencies cited attrition/turnover, transfers 
to other employment or the private sector, and retirement, among other reasons.  
• Sixteen of the 50 agencies responding reported recruitment or retention challenges specific 
to auditing titles and job functions, citing funding, salary and financial compensation, and 
identifying qualified candidates among the contributing factors. Eleven of the responding 
agencies reported not having issues, and 23 responded that the question was “not 
applicable,” which included agencies both with and without internal auditing staff.  
• The four types of audits that agencies reported most commonly performing were: (1) 
Performance/Operations, (2) Financial, (3) Compliance, and (4) Contract.  The 
questionnaire revealed that City agencies perform a range of audits that include fraud 
detection, information technology, and program focused, among other areas.  
• City agencies were s plit with respect to whether they have an internal audit plan , which 
generally consists of a plan detailing anticipated audit services for a given period of time. 
Half responded that they did have a plan and the other responded that they did not, 
indicating that certain events could trigger an internal audit, such as a request from a 
commissioner or other senior official, a request f rom an external entity or the occurrence 
of a specific incident or identification of risks, among other instances. 
• Thirty-three agencies reported that their auditors make recommendations for improvement. 
• Agencies reported a significant number of initiated and completed audits, with numerous 
agencies reporting the following: 
 Mandatory physical inventories; 
 Mandatory and discretionary pension payroll audits; 
 Mandatory audits of petty cash or employee expenses; 
 Discretionary invoice reviews; 
 Discretionary risk assessments, cybersecurity audits and contract payment audits. 
• Twenty-one of the 50 respondents reported that they had procured the services of external 
auditors to perform an audit of an agency’s programs or activities in the past five years. Of 
the 15 agencies that reported they did not have staff who perform internal audit functions, 
only one of those agencies reported procuring the services of external auditors in the past 
five years. In other words, agencies without internal auditors were not more likely to hire 
external auditors in the past five years. 
 
Commissioner Shihata thanked all the responding City agencies that took the time to assess their 
audit functions and respond to DOI’s questionnaire. 
 
This Report was prepared by Legal Fellow Dylan Evans and was supervised by Director of 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Special Counsel Rebecca Chasan and Acting Deputy Commissioner of Legal 
Affairs and General Counsel Andrew Sein. 
 
DOI is one of the oldest law-enforcement agencies in the country and New York City’s corruption watchdog. Investigations 
may involve any agency, officer, elected official or employee of the City, as well as those who do business with or receive benefits 
from the City. DOI’s strategy attacks corruption comprehensively through systemic investigations that lead to high-impact arrests, 
preventive internal controls and operational reforms that improve the way the City runs. 
 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
 
 
 
New York City 
Department of Investigation 
 
 
 
2025 Annual 
Anti-Corruption Report 
 
     
 
 
 
 
    Nadia I. Shihata 
Commissioner 
 
Dylan Evans 
Legal Fellow 
 
 
June 2026 
 
 
 
 
 

2025 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
1 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
I. Introduction ........................................................................................................................................................... 2 
II. Executive Summary ......................................................................................................................................... 3 
III. The Questionnaire Results .............................................................................................................................. 5 
A. Respondents ............................................................................................................................................... 5 
B. Staff Performing Internal Audit Functions ................................................................................................... 6 
C. Recruitment/Retention Challenges ............................................................................................................. 9 
D. Types of Audits Performed & Existence of Internal Audit Plans ................................................................ 10 
E. Subject Matter of Internal Audits ............................................................................................................... 12 
F. Procurement of External Audits ................................................................................................................ 13 
IV. Conclusion ..................................................................................................................................................... 14 
 
 
  
2025 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
2 
 
I. Introduction  
The Commissioner of the Department of Investigation (DOI) serves as the City’s 
independent inspector general, supervising a staff of Inspectors Genera l responsible 
for investigating and eliminating corruption and conflicts of interest throughout City 
government. Mayoral Executive Order No. 105 (E .O. 105) established this structure 
in 1986, consolidating the Inspector General functions of various City agencies within 
DOI.  
  
E.O. 105 also made agency heads “principally responsible for maintaining corruption-
free agencies . . . by developing procedures and systems to protect against corrupt and 
other criminal activity affecting their agency, by hiring employees of integrity and 
competence, by careful managerial oversight and high -quality supervision of agency 
employees, and by a dequate review and monitoring of fiscal commitments and 
processes within their respective agency.” City Charter § 389(a)  likewise requires 
agency heads to maintain “an internal control environment and system which is 
intended to maximize the effectiveness and integrity of agency operations and to 
reduce the vulnerability of the agency to fraud, waste, abuse, error, conflict of 
interest, and corruption.”  
  
E.O. 105 calls upon DOI to assist agencies in their efforts by preparing this Annual 
Anti-Corruption Report. The Annual Anti-Corruption Report describes the corruption 
hazards identified at City agencies and the strategies identified by the agencies, in 
consultation with DOI, to address those hazards. Although E .O. 105’s mandate 
applies only to mayoral agencies, DOI invited non-mayoral agencies to participate in 
this report and ten non-mayoral agencies contributed, as well as 40 mayoral agencies.  
  
DOI’s Anti-Corruption Report, unlike most of  DOI’s reports, is not the product of 
DOI’s investigative work but rather summarizes approaches taken by City agencies 
to address risks of corruption, misconduct, or other criminal activity. DOI generally 
obtains this information by submitting questions to other City agencies and analyzing 
their responses. The public release of this report is intended to promote information-
sharing and transparency around corruption hazards and the measures used by City 
agencies to combat corruption. In order to promote candid responses by the agencies 
participating in this and future questionnaires, individual  agency responses have 
either been aggregated or anonymized, where appropriate.  
 
2025 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
3 
 
II. Executive Summary 
The focus of the 2025 Anti-Corruption Report (the “Report”), which covers the period 
of October 1, 2024 through September 30, 2025, is the internal auditing capacities of 
the City’s agencies. To evaluate this issue , DOI developed a questionnaire (the 
“Questionnaire” or “DOI’s 2025 Anti -Corruption Questionnaire” ) regarding the 
agency staff who perform internal audit functions, recruitment or retention 
challenges that agencies face with respect to hiring and retaining auditors, the types 
of audits that agencies are performing and whether they have internal audit plans, 
the subject matter of internal audits initiated or completed during the reporting 
period, and the extent to which agencies have procured external audits. 
 
In general terms, auditing in the public sector is a “systematic process of objectively 
obtaining and evaluating evidence to determine whether information or actual 
conditions conform to established criteria .”1 Audits conducted by government 
agencies are essential to providing accountability to the public, as well as to 
legislators or oversight bodies. 2 They aid in ensuring that public resources and 
services are being used and delivered effectively, efficiently, ethically, and lawfully.3 
 
It is critical for audits to be conducted with integrity, based on judgments free of bias 
and outside influence.4 This strengthens and maintains public confidence in 
government.5 Auditing also encourages proper conduct within government  and 
reduces the risk of public corruption. 6 In this respect, internal auditing plays a vital 
role in complementing the work that DOI undertake s to combat corruption across 
City agencies.  Moreover, auditors’ recommendations  provide opportunities for 
improvement within government.7  
 
Government auditing takes various forms, but generally consists of audits of financial 
statements, of compliance with authorities, and performance audits .8 Financial 
audits typically assess whether financial information and statements are presented 
fairly and in accordance with established criteria. 9 Performance audits may pertain 
 
1 See The International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions, ISSAI 100 – Fundamental 
Principles of Public-Sector Auditing, (“ISSAI-100”), 10, available at: https://www.issai.org/wp-
content/uploads/2025/09/ISSAI-100-EN-rev.pdf.  
2 See United States Government Accountability Office, Government Auditing Standards (2024 
Revision), (“GAGAS”), §§ 1.02-05 (2024), available at: 
https://guides.gaoinnovations.gov/yellowbook/2024/GAO-24-106786.pdf.  
3 See id.  
4 See Anderson, David G. “Effective Construction Claim Resolution: Understanding DCAA.” 43 Pub. 
Cont. L.J. 165, 170 (2014). 
5 See GAGAS, § 3.09. 
6 See The Institute of Internal Auditors, The Role of Auditing In Public Sector Governance, 4 (2006), 
available at: https://www.ca-ilg.org/sites/main/files/file-attachments/auditing_in_public_sector.pdf.  
7 ISSAI-100 at 10-11. 
8 Id. 
9 GAGAS § 1.17. 
2025 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
4 
 
to assessments of  program performance, effectiveness, and comp liance with 
objectives.10 Meanwhile, compliance audits focus on whether activities comply with 
the authorities governing the audited entity, such as rules, laws, policies, and codes.11 
 
This Report reviews the auditing capacities of the City’s agencies. The results of the 
Questionnaire indicate that City agencies use different strategies to conduct audits 
and have varying  levels of  internal audit capacity. With that said, most agencies 
reported having at least some staff dedicated to performing internal audits, and that 
their auditors issue written reports and make recommendations  as a result of their 
audits. Seven agencies even referred findings from internal audits to DOI during the 
review period. 
 
Only ha lf of responding agencies re ported that they have an internal audit plan , 
which is a plan that “identifies the engagements and other internal audit services 
anticipated to be provided during a given period.” 12 This may include specifying the 
internal audit services that support the evaluation and improvement of the 
organization or agency, as well as identifying the resources necessary to accomplish 
the plan. 13 Internal audit plans enhance the ability of agencies to achieve their 
objectives, and it is best practice to have one.14 
 
For those agencies that lack an audit plan, some reported relying on requests from 
management to trigger an audit, and others reported that audits are conducted only 
when issues/risks are identified. In addition, a  minority of agencies reported issues 
with recruiting and retaining qualified auditors, and, in some cases, reported having 
fewer active auditing staff than the budgeted headcount. 
 
The Questionnaire also revealed that City agencies perform many different types of 
audits. Although performance, financial, and compliance audits were the most 
common, agencies also reported a significant number of other, more specific audits. 
These included audits pertaining to fraud detection, information technology, training 
and human resources, programs, field audits,  and ballot security, among others. A 
significant minority of agencies also procured external audit services.  
 
10 Id. §§ 1.21-22. 
11 ISSAI-100 at 11. 
12 The Institute of Internal Auditors, Global Internal Audit Standards¸ 12 (2024), available at: 
globalinternalauditstandards_2024january9.pdf. 
13 See id. at 66. 
14 See id. See also id. at 31, 60. 
2025 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
5 
 
III. The Questionnaire Results 
 
A. Respondents  
Fifty agencies responded to DOI’s 202 5 Anti-Corruption Questionnaire. Ten of the 
respondents were non-mayoral agencies. Table 1 below lists the agencies/offices that 
submitted a response: 
 
Table 1. Respondents to DOI’s 2025 Anti-Corruption Questionnaire15 
Office of Management & Budget Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 
Department of Citywide Administrative 
Services 
Office of Tax Administrative Appeals 
School Construction Authority* Mayor’s Office 
Department of Design & Construction Department of Transportation 
Law Department Taxi & Limousine Commission 
Department of Buildings Department for the Aging 
Office of Administrative Trials & 
Hearings 
Department of Probation 
Employees’ Retirement Systems* Department of Consumer and Worker 
Protection 
Housing Development Corporation* Fire Department 
Administration for Children’s Services Department of Correction 
Business Integrity Commission Mayor’s Office of Criminal Justice 
Health + Hospitals* Department of Cultural Affairs 
Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene 
Department of Investigation 
Mayor’s Office of Contract Services Department of Veterans’ Services 
Housing Authority* Police Department 
Civilian Complaint Review Board* Commission on Human Rights 
Financial Information Services Agency 
& Office of Payroll Administration* 
Department of Youth & Community 
Development 
Landmarks Preservation Commission Department of Small Business Services 
Department of City Planning Office of Technology & Innovation 
Board of Elections* Department of Housing Preservation & 
Development 
Department of Parks & Recreation Economic Development Corporation* 
Emergency Management Campaign Finance Board* 
 
15 Respondents marked with an asterisk are non-mayoral agencies. 
2025 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
6 
 
Department of Social Services Department of Finance 
Department of Sanitation Department of Environmental 
Protection 
Office of Labor Relations Department of Records and Information 
Services 
 
B. Staff Performing Internal Audit Functions 
A majority of agencies (70%) reported having staff who perform internal audit 
functions, while 30% reported that they do not  have such staff. Figures 1 & 2 below 
show agencies’ budgeted and active headcount of internal audit staff as of September 
30, 2025: 
 
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
0 1 - 15 16 - 30 31 - 45 46 - 60 61 + N/A
Number of Agencies
Budgeted Headcount (Intervals of 15)
Figure 1. Budgeted headcount of staff performing
internal audit functions as of September 30, 2025.
2025 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
7 
 
 
 
Seventeen agencies reported a lower number of active staffers than budgeted 
headcount. The majority (12) of those agencies reported a vacancy rate of 25% or less, 
meaning that at least 75% of their respective budgeted positions were filled. Only two 
agencies reported a 50% vacancy rate (i.e., that they had half as many active auditing 
staff as was budgeted), but in those cases the number of budgeted staff was just four 
and two, respectively. Separately, t wo other agencies reported having zero active 
auditing staff de spite reporting a budgeted headcount for auditing staff . In these 
cases, however, the agencies reported that they were either a new office that was not 
yet staffed, or that the auditing position itself was created recently and the agency 
was in the process of interviewing for that role.  
 
For th e nine  agencies that reported a decrease in budgeted headcount for staff 
performing internal audit functions between January 2022 through September 2025, 
they cited attrition, vacancy reductions or extended vacancies, and Citywide budget 
reductions, among other rea sons. For those agencies reporting a decrease in active 
headcount for that same period, agencies cited attrition/turnover, transfers to other 
employment or the private sector, and retirement, among other reasons.   
 
Along similar lines, the Questionnaire asked the agencies to state the office titles of 
current staff who perform internal audit functions, as well as the civil service titles 
of current staff who perform internal audit functions. The most commonly reported 
office titles were auditor, senior auditor, staff auditor, assistant commissioner, 
director or assistant director, and director of internal audit.  The most common civil 
service titles , meanwhile,  consisted of management auditor, administrative 
0
5
10
15
20
25
0 1 - 15 16 - 30 31 - 45 46 - 60 61 + N/A
Number of Agencies
Active Headcount (Intervals of 15)
Figure 2. Active headcount of staff performing internal
audit functions as of September 30, 2025.
2025 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
8 
 
management auditor, administrative staff analyst, and associate staff analyst.  
However, City agencies repor ted a wide range of  additional titles, indicating that 
there is variance among the agencies regarding which personnel conduct audits as 
part of their duties. 
 
The Questionnaire also asked the agencies to report which departments or offices 
within their respective agency house the internal audit staff. To guide the agencies 
in their responses, the Questionnaire set forth the following non -exhaustive list: 
Finance, Operations, Legal, Risk Management or Compliance, Information 
Technology, Specific Program Office, and Other.  Of these, Legal was the most 
commonly reported  department, followed by Finance . However, numerous other 
office/departments were reported . This include d, in a few instances, a designated 
“Internal Audit Department,” or in one case, an “Integrity and Standards Office.”  
Figure 3 below shows the agencies’ responses: 
 
 
 
With respect to  job-specific training and how often staff receive auditing training , 
City agencies’ answers again varied. However, several cited continuing professional 
education (CPE) credits, trainings provided by the Department of Citywide 
Administrative Services (DCAS), and annual training requirements. Some agencies 
also cited other courses, webinars, workshops, coursework, audit certifications, or 
periodic trainings offered both internally and by third-party providers.  
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
Legal Operations Risk
Management
or
Compliance
Finance Specific
Program
Office
IT N/A Other
Number of Agencies
Department/Office
Figure 3. Department or office within agency that houses
internal audit staff.
2025 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
9 
 
C. Recruitment/Retention Challenges 
Building off questions concerning the staff who perform internal audit functions, the 
Questionnaire asked agencies to identify whether they had any recruitment or 
retention challenges specific to those titles and job functions. Most agencies did not 
report having recruitment or retention challenges. Figure 4 below shows the agencies’ 
responses:16  
 
 
 
For those agencies that reported recruitment and/or retention issues,  numerous 
agencies cited issues of funding, salary and financial compensation, and identifying 
qualified candidates. Agencies also cited City-wide hiring freeze policies and lengthy 
hiring and approval process es for new employees . As one agency reported, “it is 
challenging to obtain qualified and experienced audit processionals due to the 
competitive nature of the salary for these positions.” Or, as another agency noted, a 
role in auditing  “requires specific knowledge in the City’s processes including 
contracting processes and regulations . . . It is difficult to find qualified candidates 
with transferable skillsets, especially for lower-level roles which do not require prior 
civil service experience.” 
 
 
16 Agencies that responded “not applicable” to this question included agencies both with and without 
internal auditing staff. 
11
23
16
Figure 4. Whether agencies reported recruitment or
retention challenges specific to auditing titles and job
functions.
No Not applicable Yes
2025 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
10 
 
D. Types of Audits Performed & Existence of Internal Audit Plans 
The Questionnaire asked agencies to list the types of audits  that internal audit ors 
perform. The four types of audits that agencies reported were most commonly 
performed were (1) Performance/Operations; (2) Financial, (3) Compliance, and (4) 
Contract. However, the Questionnaire revealed that City agencies perform a wide 
range of audits, indicating the unique auditing needs that each agency may have. 
Figure 5 below shows the audits performed, organized according to the number of  
agencies performing each type of audit: 
 
 
 
Notably, the City agencies were split with respect to whether they have an internal 
audit plan —which, as discussed above, generally consists of  a plan detailing 
anticipated audit services for a given period of time . Half responded that they did  
have such a plan , while the other half respond ed that they did not. Agencies that 
reported not having a plan indicated that the following events (among others) could  
trigger an internal audit: 
 
• A request from a commissioner, deputy commissioner, or management;  
• A request from an external entity;  
• The occurrence of a specific incident or the identification of risks;  
• An external referral or report of fraud, waste, or abuse; 
• An outside inquiry from an oversight entity; and  
• When issues are identified through the review of performance metrics. 
 
In contrast, for those agencies that report ed having an internal audit plan, the 
Questionnaire asked what the duration of the agency’s internal audit plan was. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35Number of Agencies
Types of Audits
Figure 5. Types of audits that agencies' internal auditors
perform.
2025 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
11 
 
Durations varied, but numerous agencies reported that their internal audit plan was 
based on an annual or “one year”  schedule. Some other agencies reported plans 
between two and four years. Additionally, for those agencies that reported having an 
internal audit plan, a significant majority indicated that additional audits may also 
be performed outside the schedule of the internal audit plan. Agencies reported that 
such audits could be prompted by  requests from management, issues/events 
identified that requi red review, risks that materialized in other organizations 
prompting an agency to determine whether it faced a similar risk, suspected fraud or 
misconduct, major operational changes, and the receipt of an external audit 
report/finding. Recommendations by DOI to take action as appropriate to address 
allegations or other issues, as well as referrals by DOI, were also cited as reason s to 
trigger an audit outside the scheduled audit plan.  The majority of agencies, though 
not all, also reported that their auditors issue written reports. See Figure 6: 
 
 
 
3
16
31
Figure 6. Whether City agencies' auditors issue written
reports.
No Not applicable Yes
2025 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
12 
 
Similarly, and significantly, the majority of agencies also reported that their auditors 
make recommendations for improvement. See Figure 7: 
 
 
 
Expanding on this line of inquiry, the Questionnaire asked the agencies to describe 
their internal processes for reviewing internal audit findings and/or 
recommendations after they are issued, and for taking any corrective action. Several 
agencies reported implementing and tracking corrective actions. This included follow-
up audits, internally developed tools to track open action plans, management reviews 
to track progress, the issuance of a final audit report and resolution after an exit 
conference is held, as well as plans to escalate unresolved issues to external oversight. 
 
Seven agencies also reported that in the last year, the ir respective  auditing 
staff/departments had made a report to DOI regarding findings from performed or 
completed audits.  
 
E. Subject Matter of Internal Audits 
The Questionnaire asked the agencies to briefly describe the subject matter of all 
internal audits initiated by their agency in the period of October 1, 2024, through 
September 30, 2025, including audits required by any Comptroller Directive. For each 
listed audit, the Questionnaire asked the agencies to indicate whether the audit was 
“mandatory” or “discretionary.” Similarly, the Questionnaire asked the agencies to 
17
33
Figure 7. Whether City agencies' auditors make
recommendations for improvement.
Not applicable Yes
2025 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
13 
 
list and describe the same with respect to completed internal audits.  Agencies 
reported a significant number of initiated and completed audits , with numerous 
agencies reporting the following:  
 
• Mandatory physical inventories; 
• Mandatory & discretionary pension payroll audits; 
• Mandatory audits of petty cash or employee expenses; 
• Discretionary invoice reviews; 
• Discretionary risk assessments; 
• Discretionary cybersecurity audits; and 
• Discretionary contract payment audits.  
 
Thirty-two respondents (64%) also reported that they administered programs or 
received funding or grants, other than City tax levy funding, that had an audit 
mandate. 
 
F. Procurement of External Audits 
In addition to questions regarding internal audits, the agencies were asked to report 
whether, in the past five years, they had procured the services of external auditors to 
perform an audit of agency programs or activities. Twenty-one of the fifty respondents 
(42%) reported that they had. However, of the fifteen agencies that reported that they 
did not have staff who perform internal audit functions,  only one of those agencies 
reported procuring the services of external auditors  in the past five years . In other 
words, agencies without inte rnal auditors were not more likely to hire external 
auditors. Meanwhile, of the thirty -five agencies that did report having internal 
auditors, twenty (approximately 57%) also reported procuring the services of external 
auditors in the past five years. 
 
As a follow-up question, the Questionnaire asked agencies to list and describe those 
external audits. The following are some examples of external audits procured in the 
past five years: 
 
• Audit of an agency’s payroll, timekeeping and employee benefits; 
• Review of an agency’s internal auditing department; 
• Assurance audit into post-employment benefits; 
• Review of documentation and coding in an electronic medical records system; 
• Assessment of an agency’s data privacy and security controls; 
• Cost reimbursement and forensic audits to identify irregularities, conflicts of 
interest, or violations of applicable regulations, contract terms, or 
organizational policies; 
• Evaluation of recruitment practices and efforts; and 
• Financial, coding, compliance, and security audits. 
 
2025 Annual Anti-Corruption Report   
 
14 
 
Similarly, the Questionnaire asked the agencies to identify any external, third-party 
audits that were initiated or completed with respect to their agency in the reporting 
period of October 1, 2024, through September 30, 2025.  Across the agencies, several 
external audits were reported, including numerous audits conducted by the New York 
City Comptroller and the New York State Comptroller. Some a gencies also  cited 
audits conducted by federal agencies  and private auditing firms. Third-party audits 
pertained to a number of topics, including (but not limited to) the following: 
 
• Personnel management practices; 
• Management of real property; 
• Review of procurement contracts; 
• Workers’ bonus claims; 
• Payment practices to not-for-profit vendors/contractors; 
• Vendors’ use of subtractors; 
• Timeliness of investigations; 
• Practices pertaining to the Freedom of Information Law; 
• Handling of workplace complaints; and 
• Automated employment decision tools. 
 
IV. Conclusion   
Government auditing provides accountability to the public and ensures that public 
resources and services are being used effectively and ethically. It also reduces the 
risk of corruption. DOI recommends that City agencies conduct audits on a consistent 
basis. While this Report demonstrates that many City agencies have robust internal 
auditing capacities, it also reveal s that many agencies lack an internal audit plan 
and, in some cases, do not issue written reports or do not have any staff conducting 
audits. Accordingly, DOI fur ther recommends that City agencies consider 
formulating a plan for internal auditing to the extent they currently lack one.  
 
However, as DOI recognizes that each agency’s auditing needs are unique, DOI also 
encourages City agencies to review their existing auditing frameworks  with an aim 
towards maximizing auditing capacities in a manner that still accords with an 
agency’s overall capacity and specific mission. 
 