more 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
NADIA I. SHIHATA 
COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE Release #10-2026 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
TUESDAY, MAY 5, 2026 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
  
DOI REPORT: ACCESS DENIED – CHALLENGES TO DOI’S OVERSIGHT 
OF THE CITY’S CHILD WELFARE SYSTEM 
 
Nadia I. Shihata, Commissioner of the New York City Department of Investigation (DOI), issued a Report 
today on the obstacles to DOI’s independent oversight of the City’s child welfare system due to the New York State 
Social Services Law (SSL) and the discretion provided by certain provisions of the SSL to a state entity. Specifically, 
five provisions in the law  significantly restrict DOI’s access to records of the City Administration for Children’s 
Services (ACS) that are essential for rigorous oversight  that includes  investigating systemic or policy failures, 
criminality, corruption, and inefficiencies.  This Report seeks to bring the public’s attention to the impediments 
presented by S tate law and the interpretation of these laws by state regulators that consistently hinder  DOI 
investigations and the fulfillment of DOI’s legal mandate. Legislation has already been introduced into the state 
legislature by Senator Jabari Brisport and Assemblymember Andrew Hevesi  that would allow DOI to fulfill its City 
Charter-mandated duty to oversee ACS’s performance and help ensure that ACS programs protect the City’s 
children. A copy of the Report can be found here: https://www.nyc.gov/site/doi/newsroom/public -reports-
current.page  
 
DOI Commissioner Nadia I. Shihata said, “DOI wholeheartedly supports the pending state legislation 
because it provides access to  critical records that are essential for DOI  to conduct rigorous and independent 
oversight that helps ensure ACS’s programs are effectively safeguarding the children in this  City. Without this 
access, DOI cannot obtain the full picture of ACS’s actions. DOI’s comprehensive investigations have a meaningful 
impact by upholding best practices as well as providing accountability when there is criminality or other misconduct. 
Just as important, DOI’s investigations, including in ACS -related matters, support the many City workers who do 
their jobs everyday with integrity and instill public confidence in City operations.” 
 
ACS is tasked with many of the City’s most sensitive functions related to the care of the City’s vulnerable 
children, including investigating reports of child abuse and maltreatment. The New York State Office of Children 
and Family Services (OCFS) is a state agency that creates and regulates many of ACS’s child-related policies and 
programs. ACS caseworkers follow the Child Protective Services Manual issued by OCFS and OCFS manages and 
maintains all reports received by the Statewide Central Register of Child Abuse and Maltreatment (SCR), a hotline 
that receives reports of child abuse and maltreatment.  
 
The Report discusses five provisions in the SSL that are obstacles to DOI’s oversight of ACS: 
 
• Three provisions in the SSL impose a requirement that DOI seek OCFS authorization before DOI can 
access almost any records related to children who have come into contact with ACS. This process often 
results in OCFS exercising its discretion in a manner that ultimately obstructs DOI’s investigations by 
denying or limiting access to records integral to DOI’s work. In DOI’s experience, OCFS’s responses 
to DOI record requests are often more restrictive than what the applicable laws intend or require and 
often appear to prioritize confidentiality over equally important concerns such as safety, transparency, 
and accountability.  

2 
 
• Two other provisions of State law prohibit DOI from accessing certain categories of ACS records 
altogether, including records related to reports of child abuse and maltreatment that ACS determined 
to be unfounded and records related to reports of child abuse and maltreatment that have been diverted 
to Collaborative Assessment, Response, Engagement & Support (CARES), an alternative- to-
investigation program where, rather than opening an investigation into an allegation of child abuse or 
maltreatment, cases can be diverted for a non-investigatory assessment of the family’s “concerns and 
needs.” These programs may only be used where caseworkers see that there is no immediate danger 
to children and where there are no allegations of serious child abuse.  As a result,  DOI is prohibited 
from conducting the kinds of investigations that it conducts into virtually every other City program, such 
as reports that an ACS employee failed to appropriately investigate alleged child abuse because the 
employee received a bribe. When a child dies after pr evious unsubstantiated ACS investigations  or 
CARES cases , these provisions also prevent DOI from looking into a family’s unsubstantiated or 
CARES history to determine if anything went wrong and if ACS’s investigations could be improved.  
 
Simply put, current state laws and  the manner in which they are interpreted by  OCFS have the practical 
effect of preventing DOI’s Charter-mandated oversight of several core ACS functions, ultimately making New York 
City’s children less safe. 
 
The Report also notes that even where DOI is notified of child fatalities and is aware of potential misconduct, 
lack of access to records often prevents DOI from exercising meaningful, comprehensive oversight. I n 2025, DOI 
was notified of 18 child fatalities where ACS had prior involvement with the family in the last decade. However , 
current state law bars DOI from accessing the full ACS history in 17 of those matters because they contained either 
unfounded child abuse investigations or had a history involving CARES. In 2024, that number was 13 out of 16, 
and in 2023, it was 19 out of 25. As a result, DOI is often forced to prematurely conclude during an initial evaluation 
of a case that no meaningful investigation is possible given the severe state law restrictions on its access to relevant 
records. This access restriction is particularly problematic because unfounded reports , and reports diverted to 
CARES, are exactly where one c ould expect to find lapses in ACS supervision or decision- making. In the Report, 
DOI discusses the facts of some of the critical matters that have gone without DOI’s robust oversight given the 
current state laws. 
 
DOI has spent years negotiating with OCFS leadership to improve the process by which DOI seeks and 
receives OCFS authorization for records. OCFS has repeatedly stated that it is following its legal obligations and 
that it does not wish to obstruct or delay DOI’s work. However, OCFS’s statements have not resulted in tangible 
improvements; to the contrary, the authorization process has become more burdensome over time, even in cases 
where ACS itself referred the initial allegations to DOI and is cooperating with the investigation. Many of DOI’s 
investigations continue to be delayed by months of negotiations and stymied by OCFS decisions not to authorize 
access to crucial records. 
 
DOI is aware of the body of work by academics and advocates explaining the sometimes -traumatizing 
effects child protective service investigations can have on families. But DOI’s oversight will not lead to a re-
investigation of families where allegations of child abuse or maltreatment were properly determined to be 
unfounded. Rather, DOI’s investigations will provide independent oversight of ACS, ensuring that its workers handle 
cases appropriately, and support the many caseworkers who are working diligently  and with integrity. And, if DOI 
can provide comprehensive recommendations to ACS on ways to improve their handling of child welfare 
investigations, it may reduce the risk that those investigations are handled in manners that are traumatizing in the 
first instance. The same laws that hamper DOI’s criminal investigations also prevent DOI from conducting policy 
reviews to assess allegations of systemic unfairness  in the child welfare system , such as racial disparities, and to 
offer recommendations on how to improve them. 
 
This Report was prepared by Deputy Inspector General Harlyn Griffenberg and Senior Inspector General 
Laura Millendorf of DOI’s Office of the Inspector General for ACS, assisted by Director of Intergovernmental 
Affairs/Special Counsel Rebecca Chasan and Special Investigative Counsel Zachary Bannon, and was 
supervised by Acting Deputy Commissioner/Chief of Investigations Audrey Feldman and Deputy Commissioner of 
Strategic Initiatives Christopher Ryan. 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
  
 
 
 
New York City 
Department of Investigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nadia I. Shihata 
Commissioner 
 
Laura Millendorf 
Senior Inspector General for the New York City Administration of 
Children’s Services 
 
Harlyn Griffenberg 
Deputy Inspector General for the New York City Administration of 
Children’s Services 
 
 
May 2026 
 
 
Access Denied:  
Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of 
 the City’s Child Welfare System  
 
 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 1  
 
 
Contents 
I. Executive Summary……………………………………………………………………. .2 
II. Introduction………………………………………………………………………………. 3 
III. ACS and Its Oversight…………………………………………………………………. .6 
 a. Administration for Children’s Services (ACS)…...………………………………. 6 
 b. The Office of Children and Family Services (OCFS)……………………………. 9 
 c. The Department of Investigation (DOI)…………………………………………. 10 
IV. State Law Restrictions on DOI’s Access to Records and Their Consequences...12 
 a. Laws that Require OCFS Approval for DOI to Access Records………………13  
 b. Laws that Prohibit DOI from Accessing Records………………………………. 18 
V. The Effect and Importance of State Legislation to Amend the SSL……………. 27 
VI. Conclusion………………………………………………………………………………. .30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 2  
 
 
I. Executive Summary 
 
The Administration for Children’s Services (ACS) is tasked with many of the 
City’s most sensitive functions related to the care of New York City’s vulnerable 
children, including investigating reports of child abuse and maltreatment. The 
Department of Inves tigation (DOI) acts as ACS’s independent watchdog —ensuring 
that ACS services are not tainted by systemic or policy failures, criminality, 
corruption, or inefficiencies , while reviewing ACS’s program delivery to help ACS 
carry out its functions effectively and efficiently. Unfortunately, despite DOI’s broad 
legal authority to serve as ACS’s Inspector General, five provisions of the New York 
State Social Services Law (SSL) , significantly restrict DOI’s access to ACS records 
essential for rigorous oversight , even where ACS is  otherwise willing and able to 
provide them. This report seeks to bring the public’s attention to the impediments 
presented by state law, and the interpretation of these laws by state regulators, that 
consistently hinder DOI investigations and the fulfillment of DOI’s legal mandate.  
 
Three of the provisions discussed in this report impose a requirement that DOI 
seek authorization from the New York State Office of Children and Family Services 
(OCFS)—a state agency that creates and regulates many of ACS’s child -related 
policies and programs—before DOI can access almost any records related to children 
who have come into contact with ACS. This process is not only burdensome and time-
consuming, it often results in OCFS exercising its discretion in a manner  that 
ultimately obstructs DOI’s investigations by denying  or limiting  access to records 
integral to DOI’s work. In DOI’s experience, OCFS’s responses to DOI ’s record 
requests are often more restrictive than what the applicable laws  intend or require 
and often appear to prioritize confidentiality over equally important concerns such as 
safety, transparency, and accountability. For example, DOI has received complaints 
that ACS caseworkers entrusted to protect the City’s children have themselves been 
allegedly engaged in abuse of children in th eir personal lives. When DOI sought to 
investigate these allegations to help determine whether ACS should prohibit those 
caseworkers from working with children, OCFS denied DOI access to any information 
about the caseworker’s underlying abuse or maltreatment history, in one instance 
stating: “An ACS employee . . . being investigated in their professional capacity does 
not establish a need for DOI to review open child protective records pertaining to an 
individual’s contact with the child welfare system in their personal capacity.”  
 
Moreover, in those instances when OCFS approves access requests, it often 
first requires that DOI provide it with confidential investigatory information, thereby 
compromising the integrity and independence of DOI’s investigations. In addition to 
determining many ACS policies, OCFS works regularly and closely with ACS by 
supervising ACS child welfare  programs. Accordingly, OCFS is understandably 
invested in ensuring that these policies and programs are viewed positively. The work 
of the two agencies is  thus intertwined. If DOI pinpoints a failing in ACS policies, 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 3  
 
 
publicly reports on ACS’s systemic failures, or uncovers criminality related to 
regulatory issues, OCFS may be implicated by those results. There is , therefore, an 
inherent conflict of interest in having OCFS  act as the  gatekeeper of information 
necessary for DOI’s independent investigations. By restricting DOI’s access to 
information, OCFS may effectively shield itself from any scrutiny resulting from the 
oversight that DOI is mandated to provide to ACS.  
 
The two other provisions of state law discussed in this report prohibit DOI from 
accessing certain categories of ACS records altogether, including records related to 
reports of child abuse and maltreatment that ACS determined to be unfounded. As a 
result, DOI is prohibited from conducting the kinds of investigations that it conducts 
into virtually every other City program, such as reports that an ACS employee failed 
to appropriately investigate alleged child abuse because the  employee received a 
bribe. For example, if DOI receives a complaint that an ACS caseworker did not 
substantiate child abuse allegations against a mother because he coerced her to 
provide sexual favors in exchange for a favorable outcome, DOI would not be able to 
investigate the complain t because the underlying child abuse investigation would 
have been deemed unfounded by the ACS worker, and the record would be sealed  
under current law . When a child dies after previous unsubstantiated ACS 
investigations, these provisions also prevent DOI from looking into the family’s 
unsubstantiated history to determine if anything went wrong and whether  ACS’s 
investigations could be improved.  
 
Simply put, current state laws and the manner in which they are interpreted 
by OCFS have the practical effect of preventing DOI’s Charter- mandated oversight 
of several core ACS functions, ultimately making New York City’s children less safe.  
 
By highlighting the oversight that DOI is prevented from conducting due to 
these provisions of the SSL, DOI seeks to bring to the public’s attention the urgent 
need for legislation to change the law —legislation that has already been introduced 
into the state legislature by Senator Jabari Brisport and Assemblymember Andrew 
Hevesi. Passage of these bills will allow DOI to fulfill its City Charter-mandated duty 
to oversee ACS’s performance and to help ensure that ACS  programs protect the 
City’s children. 
II. Introduction 
 
Often referred to as the “watchdogs” of government, Inspectors General hold 
officials and agencies accountable for misconduct, enhance government efficiency and 
effectiveness, and ensure operational transparency.
1 The Department of 
 
1 Glenn A. Fine, Watchdogs: Inspectors General and the Battle for Honest and Accountable 
Government, (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2024), 14. 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 4  
 
 
Investigation (DOI) serves as New York City’s Inspector General. The New York City 
Charter grants DOI the wide-ranging authority “to make any study or investigation 
which in [the Commissioner’s] opinion may be in the best interests of the city, 
including but not limited to investigations of the affairs, functions, accounts, 
methods, personnel or efficiency of any agency .”2 DOI thus has  a mandate to hold 
government officials accountable and help ensure that City agencies serve the public 
in a manner that is free from criminality, corruption, waste, fraud, and abuse. To 
carry out its mission, DOI has broad investigative powers including t he ability to 
compel the testimony of witnesses
3 and to access records prepared or maintained by 
any Mayoral agency.4 The clear intent of the laws empowering DOI is to provide DOI 
with robust authority and access to the information it needs to conduct investigations. 
For virtually all City agencies, DOI has this access. However, DOI has long been 
hampered in its ability to exercise oversight of the agency charged with protecting 
New York City’s most vulnerable children. 
 
Specifically, DOI is tasked with oversight of the Administration for Children’s 
Services (ACS), which is responsible for “the care and protection of children.”
5 ACS 
carries out some of the most critical government functions imaginable—for example, 
investigating reports of child abuse or maltreatment and removing children from 
severely abusive homes.
6 Most ACS staff fulfill their duties diligently and with 
integrity. But when there are allegations of wrongdoing or systemic failures by ACS 
employees who are supposed to keep children safe, it is DOI’s Charter-mandated duty 
to investigate those allegations and hold ACS and its employees to account  when 
warranted. However, several provisions of state law have limited DOI’s ability to 
investigate these cases. Broadly, these laws: (1) subject DOI’s access to many records 
to the discretion of a state agency, the New York State Office of Children and Family 
Services ( OCFS); and (2) prohibit DOI from accessing entire categories of records 
critical to its investigations.  
 
These restrictions have prevented DOI from accessing evidence needed to 
provide oversight with respect to some of ACS’s most important functions, including 
ACS’s role in investigating the death of children whose families have previously been 
the subjects of reported abuse or maltreatment. In some circumstances, such as when 
 
2 New York City Charter § 803(b).  
3 New York City Charter § 805. 
4 Mayoral Executive Order 16 of 1978 § 4(a). 
5 New York City Charter § 617. 
6 For the purposes of this report, DOI will use the phrase “child abuse or maltreatment” to describe 
all types of child welfare cases including abuse, maltreatment, and neglect. This is the same 
terminology ACS uses in its child welfare investigations. See New York City Administration for 
Children’s Services, A Parent’s Guide to a Child Abuse or Maltreatment Investigation, available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/acs/child-welfare/parents-guide-child-abuse-investigation.page. 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 5  
 
 
ACS does not substantiate allegations of child abuse or diverts those allegations to 
its alternative -to-investigation program, the laws functionally prohibit DOI from 
conducting any oversight to determine whether ACS’s investigations or diversion 
assessments were tainted by criminality, corruption, or incompetence.  While ACS is 
not unique among City agencies in the legal requirement  for independent oversight, 
state law places unique limitations on DOI’s ability to provide that oversight. 
 
Former DOI Commissioner Jocelyn Strauber brought this issue to the public’s 
attention plainly last spring when she wrote: 
 
When a New York City child dies or suffers severe injury due to neglect 
or abuse, it’s not only a tragedy — it’s a failure that should prompt city 
government to ask where we went wrong and what we can do better. 
 
If the child and family are known to the city Administration for 
Children’s Services, only an independent, objective look at ACS’s work 
can answer that question. 
 
But right now that is impossible. 
 
Why? 
 
Because New York state law prevents any independent oversight body 
from accessing the full record of ACS’s involvement with the city’s 
children and families.
7 
 
Senator Jabari Brisport and Assemblymember Andrew Hevesi have 
introduced bills into the state legislature (S.8205 and A.8248A) 8 that would allow 
DOI to access the records that it needs to exercise meaningful oversight of ACS’s most 
critical functions. DOI supports (and has long supported) 9 passage of this proposed 
legislation.  
 
 
7 Jocelyn Strauber, NYC’s child protectors lack oversight even when kids die –  unleash the city’s 
watchdog, THE NY POST (May 30, 2025), available at https://nypost.com/2025/05/30/opinion/acs-hides-
deadly-child-abuse-unleash-the-citys-watchdog/. 
8 Available for review at https://www.nysenate.gov/legislation/bills/2025/A8248/amendment/A . 
9 See, e.g., Annika Pergament, Exclusive: DOI commissioner emphasizes the need for transparency in 
ACS cases, SPECTRUM NEWS NY1 (May 19, 2025), available at https://ny1.com/nyc/all-boroughs/the-
rush-hour/2025/05/19/doi-commissioner-emphasizes-the-need-for-transparency-in-acs-cases. 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 6  
 
 
 DOI’s public reports often bring its investigative findings to the public’s 
attention, while highlighting the ways in which agency programs could be reformed.10 
This report seeks to accomplish something slightly different—to bring to the public’s 
attention the kinds of investigations that DOI has been prevented from  conducting 
because of the state laws referenced above and OCFS’s overly broad exercise of the  
discretion some of those laws provide. In doing so, DOI will draw attention to the 
practical consequences of the complicated information -sharing restrictions imposed 
by those provisions. This discussion will show the urgency of passing legislation to 
amend the SSL.  
 
 This report will proceed in three parts. First , it will explain the relationship 
between the three entities principally addressed in the state laws that are the subject 
of this report —ACS, OCFS, and DOI. Second , it will explain the two types of 
information-sharing restrictions imposed by the state laws and how those restrictions 
have hampered DOI’s investigations of specific matters of immense public 
importance. And third, it will explain the changes introduced by the bills pending in 
the State Legislature, including how the legislation would empower DOI to conduct 
the kind of oversight that the New York City Charter contemplates (and the public 
expects) it will exercise over ACS. 
III. ACS and Its Oversight 
 
ACS is a City agency that carries out its mission to protect the well -being of 
children, subject to the statewide policies, regulations, and supervision of OCFS. DOI 
is a law enforcement agency  that investigates and seeks to prevent criminality, 
corruption, fraud, waste, abuse , conflicts of interest, unethical conduct, and 
inefficiency in City government. DOI is the independent oversight agency  with both 
criminal and civil investigatory authority  for nearly all New York City agencies, 
employees, elected officials, and contractors that do business with the City, including 
ACS and its contractors. 11 The responsibilities of and relationships between each of 
these entities, as are relevant to this report, are discussed below. 
a. Administration for Children’s Services (ACS) 
 
ACS is a City agency vested with the Charter authority to “perform functions 
related to the care and protection of children.” 12 These responsibilities include 
 
10 DOI’s reports are available on its website: https://www.nyc.gov/site/doi/newsroom/public-reports-
current.page.  
11 New York City Charter § 803(f).  
12 New York City Charter § 617(a). 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 7  
 
 
providing families with preventive services, 13 operating juvenile detention centers, 
managing foster care, providing child care subsidies, and investigating reports of 
child abuse and maltreatment. 14 In the past, DOI investigations have uncovered 
deficiencies with ACS’s performance of several of these functions, prompting DOI to 
issue recommendations to address systemic failures and strengthen ACS’s services.15 
This report will focus primarily on ACS’s child welfare responsibilities.     
 
With respect to reports of child abuse or maltreatment, in general, ACS’s 
investigations begin when ACS receives a report from the Statewide Central Register 
of Child Abuse and Maltreatment (SCR), a hotline maintained by OCFS to receive 
reports of child abuse and maltreatment.16 Once allegations are received by the SCR, 
the terms of ACS investigations are dictated by state law.17 Within sixty days of ACS 
initiating an investigation, ACS employees must determine whether the SCR report 
is “indicated” (meaning that a preponderance of the evidence supports the allegation 
of abuse) or “unfounded” (a preponderance of the evidence does n ot support the 
allegation of abuse).
18 By law, unfounded reports are sealed and unavailable to the 
public or law enforcement, with limited exceptions, although those reports are 
available to an ACS employee assigned to subsequent child abuse or maltreatment 
investigations involving the same subject, same child, or the child’s sibling.
19   
 
 
13 Preventive services are designed to help families keep their children safely at home. They help to 
promote safety, permanency, and well-being for children and their families in their own homes and 
communities. See Administration for Children’s Services, Preventive Services, available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/acs/child-welfare/parent-support.page. 
14 New York City Charter § 617(a); see also New York City Administration for Children’s Services, 
About ACS, https://www.nyc.gov/site/acs/about/about.page (last visited May 14, 2025). 
15 For example, in 2018, a DOI evaluation of ACS’s oversight of several Family Foster Care providers 
led to the issuance of twelve policy and procedure recommendations, all of which were accepted by 
ACS. See Mark G. Peters, Review of ACS’ Systematic Safety Accountability Mechanisms for Foster 
Care Providers (Oct. 2018), available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2018/Oct/ACS_Rpt_Release_Final_10122018.pdf .  
16 Social Services Law (SSL) § 422(2). Tens of thousands of reports are filed with SCR each year. See 
New York City, Administration for Children’s Services, Flash Report monthly Indicators March 
2026, available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/acs/pdf/data-analysis/flashReports/2026/03.pdf.  
17 SSL § 422(2)(a); see also New York City Administration for Children’s Services, A Parent’s Guide to 
a Child Abuse or Maltreatment Investigation, available at https://www.nyc.gov/site/acs/child-
welfare/parents-guide-child-abuse-investigation.page. 
18 In 2024, 29.0% of ACS child welfare investigations were indicated. In  2025, 31.1% of child welfare 
investigations were indicated. See New York City Administration for Children’s Services, Flash 
Report monthly Indicators March 2026, available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/acs/pdf/data-
analysis/flashReports/2026/03.pdf. 
19 SSL § 422(5). 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 8  
 
 
State law also allows for alternative- to-investigation programs where, rather 
than opening an investigation into an allegation of child abuse or maltreatment, cases 
can be diverted for a  non-investigatory assessment of the family’s “concerns and 
needs.”20 These programs focus on collaboration with families to assess child safety 
needs and to provide support for a family’s ability to safely care for their children. 21 
These programs may only be used “where caseworkers see that there is no immediate 
danger to children and where there are no allegations of serious child abuse.”22 ACS’s 
program is called Collaborative Assessment, Response, Engagement & Support 
(CARES). In the last several years, ACS has nearly doubled its use of CARES. 23 By 
2024, 25% of ACS’s SCR reports were diverted into CARES.24 ACS screens “a broad 
range of allegations” for CARES eligibility25 and, while there are criteria in place to 
guide CARES eligibility, diversion determinations remain subject to the fallibility of 
individual decision-making. As with unfounded reports, records of cases diverted to 
CARES are sealed under the current law, subject to limited exceptions.26  
 
Local law prescribes a limited role for ACS to conduct reviews of its own work 
with respect to child fatalities. Pursuant to Local Law 19 of 2018, ACS is required to 
issue a systemic child fatality review every year , which includes: (1) the number of 
fatalities of children known to ACS; (2) the manner and/or cause of death; (3) 
demographic information about the children; (4) any relevant trends and systemic 
recommendations; and (5) a summary of any case practice findings and agency policy 
changes made in re sponse to child fatalities in the previous 12 months. ACS’s most 
recent report was issued in June 2025 for the 2023 calendar year.
27 These reports 
discuss fatalities from a bird’s eye view and focus on statistical data and systemic 
 
20 SSL § 427-a; see also New York State Office of Children and Family Services, Family Assessment 
Response, available at https://ocfs.ny.gov/programs/cps/assessment-response.php. 
21 Id. 
22 Id. 
23 New York City Administration for Children’s Services, Flash Report monthly Indicators January 
2026, available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/acs/pdf/data-analysis/flashReports/2026/01.pdf. 
24 Press Release, Administration for Children’s Services Doubles Number of ‘CARES’ Units in Just 
Two Years, ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN’S SERVICES (Jan. 23, 2024), available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/acs/pdf/PressReleases/2024/number-of-cares-units-double.pdf.  
25 New York City Administration for Children’s Services, New York City Family Assessment Response 
(FAR) Application (2012), available at https://ocfs.ny.gov/programs/prevention/assets/docs/far-
apps/Queens-FAR-Application-2012.pdf.  
26 SSL § 427-a(5). 
27 New York City Administration for Children’s Services, Systemic Child Fatality Review - 2023 
Annual Report, available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/acs/pdf/data-analysis/2023/annual-child-
fatality-report.pdf.  
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 9  
 
 
changes. They do not discuss specific fatalities,28 nor do they include any assessment 
of potential misconduct or criminality on the part of the ACS employees or contractors 
involved in individual cases.  
b. The Office of Children and Family Services (OCFS) 
 
OCFS is a state entity that supervises ACS and directs ACS policy in many 
areas—by promulgating r egulations and guidance for programs administered by ACS 
and overseeing ACS’s compliance with certain regulatory requirements. For example, 
when conducting child welfare investigations, ACS caseworkers follow the Child 
Protective Services Manual issued by OCFS. 29 OCFS manages and maintains all 
reports received by the SCR and all information documenting child welfare 
investigations by ACS. OCFS also establishes statewide administrative rules relating 
to the management of child welfare subsidies, attendance records at child  care 
facilities, and the daily operations at juvenile detention facilities . ACS and OCFS 
have publicized their partnership across a broad range of ACS programs, from 
working together on projects ranging from improvements to ACS’s foster care 
program
30 to efforts to reduce racial disparities in the child welfare system.31 Because 
of these partnerships, OCFS often shares in ACS’s programmatic successes and 
failures.  
 
OCFS also plays an oversight role with respect to ACS’s child fatality 
investigations; it is required to review each ACS investigation that involves a child 
fatality and to issue a summary report within six months of ACS’s investigation.
32 
These reviews are required to document certain statutorily required information, 
including the cause of death; the child protective services provided to the child; 
information on the circumstances of the death; the nature of assistance and care 
received b y the child from ACS prior to death; a summary of the investigation 
undertaken by ACS; and, as appropriate, recommendations for local or state 
 
28 See SSL §§ 422-b, 20(5).  
29 See New York State Office of Children and Family, Child Protective Services Manual, available at 
https://ocfs.ny.gov/programs/cps/manual/. 
30 See New York City Administration for Children’s Services, Strong Families Initiative, available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/acs/about/titleIV.page (discussing ACS’s partnership with OCFS to utilize 
federal funding “to promote greater stability, permanency and well-being for children in foster care”). 
31 See NYC’s ACS, Public Schools, and NYS OCFS Unveil Plans to Tackle Racial Disparities in Child 
Welfare, HARLEM WORLD (Oct. 19, 2023), available at https://www.harlemworldmagazine.com/nycs-
acs-public-schools-and-nys-ocfs-unveil-plans-to-tackle-racial-disparities-in-child-welfare/ (discussing 
ACS’s partnership with OCFS in improving training for mandatory reporters). 
32 SSL §§ 20(5)(a), 422-b. OCFS is not obligated to conduct these reviews where an OCFS-approved 
Child Fatality Review Team has prepared a fatality report that has been approved by OCFS. SSL 
§ 442-b(2). ACS has informed DOI that it has a state-approved Child Fatality Review Team. 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 10  
 
 
administrative or policy changes.33 OCFS describes its review of ACS’s investigation 
as being to determine whether “there were lapses in adhering to state regulation or 
policy” that require corrective action. 34 OCFS’s fatality reviews rely solely on the 
“documents collected or created by the child welfare agency that is involved with the 
family” and OCFS “do[es] not interview the people involved.” 35 Importantly, OCFS 
reports do not include any assessment of potential misconduct, negligence, or 
criminality on the part of the ACS employees or contracted agencies involved in the 
underlying ACS investigations. OCFS is also required by state law to publish an 
annual child fatality report similar to the systemic child fatality review conducted by 
ACS,
36 but the last report available online from OCFS covers 2022.37  
 
c. The Department of Investigation (DOI) 
 
Unlike OCFS, DOI does not play a direct  supervisory role in the 
implementation of ACS programs  and therefore does not have an intertwined 
relationship with ACS. DOI’s only role with respect to ACS is to provide independent 
oversight. DOI’s reviews also go beyond assessing compliance with state regulations 
or policies . Its broad oversight mandate is set forth in the Charter, which 
“authorize[s] and empower[s] [DOI] to make any study or investigation which in [its] 
opinion may be in the best interests of the city, including but not limited to 
investigations of the affairs, functions, accounts, methods, personnel, or efficiency of 
any agency.”
38 Also unlike OCFS, DOI is an investigatory and law enforcement 
 
33 Id. § 20(5)(b). 
34 New York State Office of Children and Family Services, Child Fatality Reports , available at 
https://ocfs.ny.gov/reports/cfrp/.  
35 New York State Office of Children and Family Services, Child Fatality Review and Prevention, 
available at https://ocfs.ny.gov/programs/cwcs/cfrp.php. By conducting only a review of records 
provided by ACS, OCFS is prevented from identifying or investigating situations where those records 
themselves are compromised.  
36 SSL § 20(5). 
37 New York State Office of Children and Family Services, Reports Search, available at 
https://ocfs.ny.gov/reports/. 
38 New York City Charter § 803(b). Decades of case law supports DOI’s broad investigatory 
jurisdiction, which extends to all aspects of the City’s child welfare system and ACS’s discharge of its 
duties. DOI may conduct any investigation that is “a means to the end of a better discharge of some 
duty imposed upon, or a better exercise of some power that lawfully may be exercised by, the 
executive branch of the city government.” In re Ellis, 176 Misc. 887, 888 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1941). DOI’s 
Charter-mandated powers “are of great importance for the efficient administration of the huge 
machinery of government in the city of New York.” In re Edge Ho Holding Corp., 256 N.Y. 374, 381 
(1931). DOI may investigate, for example, “the efficiency of governmental methods” (In re Edge Ho 
Holding Corp. at 379), criminal matters (City of New York v. Uniformed Fire Officers Ass’n, 95 
N.Y.2d, 273 (2000)), and “private businesses licensed by a City agency” (New York Shredding Corp. 
v. New York City Dep't of Investigation, 184 Misc. 2d 174, 178 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 2000)). Private 
individuals or entities are not “shield[ed] from DOI’s investigative power.” New York City Dep't of 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 11  
 
 
agency that routinely conducts criminal investigations, works alongside prosecutorial 
partners on long -term, pre -arrest investigations, and investigates individual 
employee misconduct as well as systemic failures that lead to real-world harm. 
 
Given this wide -ranging authority and investigatory expertise, DOI’s 
investigations have spanned many of the different programs administered by ACS, 
from reviews of the impact of Raise the Age legislation on ACS’s juvenile detention 
centers
39 to reviews of ACS’s safety accountability mechanisms to ensure child safety 
at foster care providers40 to in-depth investigations into failures in ACS’s Emergency 
Children’s Services unit in a case of child abuse and neglect. 41 DOI’s investigations 
also range broadly in their substantive scope, from holistic reviews of program 
functions over several years (like the foster care provider investigation mentioned 
above) to investigations into the criminality of individual ACS employees (which have 
led to the convictions, for example, of ACS employees for stealing City funds 
designated to help children in need 42 and of an ACS contractor for having sex with 
children in City-contracted juvenile centers43). 
 
*  *  * 
 
 
Investigation v. Passannante, 148 A.D.2d 101, 104 (1st Dept. 1989). In short, “DOI has a mandate, 
based on the City Charter, to ensure that the practices and procedures of city agencies are 
legitimate, do not lead to abuse of process, and are in the best interests of the City.” Parkhouse v. 
Stringer, 55 A.D.3d 1, 8 (1st Dept. 2008), aff’d 12 N.Y.3d 660 (2009). 
39 Jocelyn E. Strauber, The Impact of Raise the Age & Bail Reform: Safety, Disciplinary, & Staffing 
Challenges at the City’s Juvenile Detention Facilities (Oct. 2024), available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/press-releases/2024/October/40DYFJRpt.Release.pdf. 
40 Mark G. Peters, Review of ACS’ Systemic Safety Accountability Mechanisms for Foster Care 
Providers (Oct. 2018), available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2018/Oct/ACS_Rpt_Release_Final_10122018.pdf .  
41 Mark G. Peters, Summary of DOI’s Investigation of the City Administration for Children’s Services’ 
Response to Abuse and Neglect Allegations Related to Jaden Jordan  (Jan. 26, 2017), available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/press-releases/2017/jan/05ACSstmt01-26-2017.pdf. DOI’s 
investigation found that the depth of errors by ACS over a two-day period prior to Jaden’s death 
were so significant, and the errors involved the overall implementation of policies so basic, that they 
went to the heart of ACS’s core mission of protecting children and implicated high-level, systemic 
problems. 
42 Press Release, D.A. Bragg, DOI Commissioner Strauber Announce Guilty Plea of Former ACS 
Director for Stealing Gift Cards from Children, DISTRICT ATTORNEY, NEW YORK COUNTY (Apr. 9, 
2024), available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/press-
releases/2024/April/DANYGiftCards04.09.2024.pdf. 
43 Press Release, D.A. Rocah, Former Juvenile Center Employee Convicted for Having Intercourse 
with Teen at Westchester Campus, DISTRICT ATTORNEY, WESTCHESTER COUNTY (Oct. 15, 2024), 
available at https://www.westchesterda.net/october-2024/former-juvenile-center-employee-convicted-
for-having-intercourse-with-teen-at-westchester-campus. 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 12  
 
 
OCFS and DOI’s individual relationships to ACS are different. OCFS acts as a 
partner to ACS in the supervision and implementation of ACS programs and provides 
oversight heavily focused on preserving confidentiality of records and ensuring 
compliance with OCFS’s own administrative rules. To DOI’s knowledge, OCFS rarely 
refers criminal matters to law enforcement. Meanwhile, DOI’s mandate is broader—
conducting systemic reviews of ACS’s programs, issuing public recommendations to 
improve public safety and agency accountability, and investigating potential criminal 
conduct of individual ACS employees.  DOI’s independent oversight is  legally 
mandated for all City agencies, and critical to ensur ing the proper functioning of 
programs implemented by ACS , which in turn keep the children of New York City 
safe. As explained below, the independence of DOI’s work is compromised where its 
investigations are subject to the approval of an entity that  directly supervises and 
often partners with ACS in implementing ACS’s program s, as state law currently 
requires. For example, DOI examinations of ACS child welfare investigations may 
involve a review and critique of the standards and procedures set out in OCFS’s Child 
Protective Services Manual, which ACS caseworkers rely on when i nvestigating 
allegations of child abuse or maltreatment. OCFS can shield its own standards from 
scrutiny by declining to authorize DOI access to records that would implicate OCFS  
standards, even where DOI is attempting to conduct the oversight of ACS required 
by the New York City Charter. These concerns are not  hypothetical; multiple DOI 
investigations into ACS’s handling of child abuse or maltreatment investigations 
have resulted in policy recommendations to OCFS.
44 Changes in state law  are 
necessary to eliminate the conflict inherent in this statutory regime and to restore 
DOI’s ability to conduct independent oversight of ACS. 
IV. State Law Restrictions on DOI’s Access to Records and Their 
Consequences 
 
State law imposes two categories of restrictions on DOI’s access to records that 
are critical to its oversight of ACS: (1) requirements that DOI receive OCFS approval 
before accessing certain categories of records; and (2) outright prohibitions on DOI’s 
access to certain categories of records. These restrictions impact DOI’s investigations 
in many ways, as record- access restrictions can result in DOI conducting 
investigations with only a partial view of the relevant facts. In some circumstances, 
entire area s of ACS’s practices are fully insulated from DOI’s oversight. It is 
 
44 See Rose Gill Hearn, DOI & John B. Mattingly, ACS, A Department of Investigation Examination 
of Eleven Child Fatalities and One Near Fatality, at 128 (Aug. 2007), available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2007/2007-08-09-Acsreport_pdfaug.pdf (recommending 
that OCFS tape calls to the SCR hotline); Mark G. Peters, Summary of DOI’s Investigation of the 
City Administration for Children’s Services’ Response to Abuse and Neglect Allegations Related to 
Jaden Jordan at 3 (Jan. 26, 2017), available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/press-
releases/2017/jan/05ACSstmt01-26-2017.pdf (recommending that ACS work with OCFS to ensure 
that OCFS refers allegations of criminal activity to ACS and the NYPD concurrently).  
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 13  
 
 
important for the public to understand that these restrictions are not merely 
theoretical—they impact every DOI investigation involving child abuse, foster care, 
or juvenile detention. This section will demonstrate the existence of tangible hurdles 
by describing the access restrictions that DOI faces as well as providing real 
examples
45 of how those restrictions have impaired DOI’s investigations. 
a. Laws that Require OCFS Approval for DOI to Access Records 
 
The Laws: Three provisions of the SSL, specifically §§ 372, 422, and 496, 
require DOI to seek authorization from OCFS before receiving virtually any child -
related records from ACS.46 
 
SSL § 422(4)(A) makes all records related to reports of abuse or maltreatment 
to the SCR presumptively confidential. Most criminal law enforcement agents —
ranging from district attorneys to sworn officers of a county department of parks —
may nevertheless access these records by requesting them from ACS and asserting 
that the records are necessary to conduct a specified criminal investigation or an 
investigation of a missing child.
47 These agencies need not seek approval from OCFS 
to access those records. However, the statute distinguishes DOI, stating that DOI can 
only access the same records if they are “essential to an investigation within the legal 
authority of [DOI]” and if OCFS provides “prior approval.”48 The SSL does not define 
“essential,” nor does it specify which entity should determine whether records are 
“essential” to DOI.49  
 
During discussions about DOI’s records access over several years, OCFS 
executive staff have asserted that OCFS does not wish to dictate what information is 
essential to DOI’s work, nor to obstruct or delay DOI’s work, nor to undermine or 
direct DOI’s inves tigative methods. Notwithstanding its stated intentions , in 
practice, OCFS has made  unilateral determinations as to what records are 
“essential,” frequently rejecting DOI’s own explanation of its need for records to 
further its investigations.  Ultimately, OCFS’s position on what qualifies as  
“essential” to a DOI investigation appears to reflect a fundamental misunderstanding 
of DOI’s mandate and jurisdiction. For example, OCFS has informed DOI that it 
cannot produce records to DOI related to allegations that someone made a false report 
 
45 To preserve privacy and confidentiality, all examples utilized in this report are either anonymized 
or based on public materials. 
46 Records related to child care subsidies are not subject to the confidentiality rules discussed in this 
report. See SSL § 410. 
47 SSL § 422(4)(A)(l). 
48 SSL § 422(4)(A)(m). 
49 SSL §§ 422(4)(A)(m), (2). 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 14  
 
 
of child abuse because “[f]alse reporting is a crime by a member of the public.” But 
every false report triggers an obligation on ACS to investigate the report, draining 
ACS’s limited resources , which DOI is mandated to help protect. 50 As another 
example, OCFS has informed DOI that it cannot produce records to DOI “to 
investigate how ACS conducts [child abuse] investigations and determine if [the] 
work of ACS could be improved,” reasoning that “DOI is not a social services agency 
and is not statutorily charged with general oversight over child protective services.” 
Again, this response appears to fundamentally misunderstand DOI’s mandate under 
the City Charter. R ecommending policy reforms to City agencies  – including social 
services agencies –  falls squarely within  DOI’s statutory jurisdiction and DOI has 
done so on multiple occasions with respect to ACS’s child abuse investigations.
51 52 
DOI’s jurisdiction is broad, extending to “any study or investigation which in [the 
Commissioner of Investigation’s] opinion may be in the best interests of the city  
including but not limited to investigations of the affairs, functions, accounts, 
methods, personnel or efficiency of any agency.53 
 
SSL § 372 makes all records related to children in foster care and juvenile 
detention presumptively confidential. The law sets forth conditions under which some 
entities can receive those records, for example, comptrollers for audits and 
researchers for research purposes,
54 but contains no mention of DOI. DOI’s access to 
these records is left to the complete discretion of OCFS. In multiple conversations 
with OCFS leadership, OCFS has informed DOI that it interprets the statutory 
silence on DOI’s access to such records as license to apply a heightened standard to 
DOI’s request for these records. It is unclear why OCFS believes that this approach 
is required by the statute or consistent with the public interest. 
 
 
50 ACS has previously requested that DOI investigate false reporting for this very reason , and 
District Attorney’s offices have referred false reporting complaints to DOI for investigation as well.  
51 See Rose Gill Hearn, DOI & John B. Mattingly, ACS, A Department of Investigation Examination 
of Eleven Child Fatalities and One Near Fatality (Aug. 2007), available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2007/2007-08-09-Acsreport_pdfaug.pdf; Mark G. Peters, 
Report on ACS Policy and Practice Violations Identified in Three Child Welfare Cases and Related 
Analysis of Certain Systemic Data (Apr. 2016), available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2016/2016-05-03-14-ACS-Report-FINAL.pdf; Mark G. 
Peters, Summary of DOI’s Investigation of the City Administration for Children’s Services’ Response 
to Abuse and Neglect Allegations Related to Jaden Jordan (Jan. 26, 2017), available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/press-releases/2017/jan/05ACSstmt01-26-2017.pdf. 
52 While many of DOI’s staff are subject matter experts, there is no requirement that oversight 
agencies or Inspectors General share a professional background with the agencies they oversee.  
Inspectors General routinely have investigative backgrounds and oversee a wide range of 
government functions while not performing those functions themselves.  
53 New York City Charter § 803(b). 
54 SSL § 372(4)(b), (4-b). 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 15  
 
 
Finally, SSL § 496 makes records related to investigations of abuse pursuant 
to the Protection of People with Special Needs title of the SSL presumptively 
confidential.55 As with SSL § 422, most law enforcement agencies can nevertheless 
access these records by stating that their access is for approved purposes, but DOI 
cannot access these records without seeking prior approval from OCFS upon a 
showing that the records are “essential to an investigation within the legal authority 
of [DOI].”56  
 
The Consequences: The OCFS authorization process routinely impairs DOI’s 
ability to conduct thorough, independent investigations and to assess initial 
complaints. Moreover, because these access restrictions apply to communications as 
well as written records, they have prevented DOI from conducting interviews with 
victims of alleged criminal conduct. The authorization process is often time 
consuming and compromises investigations that are time sensitive. In several 
instances, DOI has spent months negotiating with OCFS to gain acc ess to pedigree 
information of witnesses or copies of child welfare investigative files . DOI receives 
hundreds of complaints from the public each year alleging misconduct or systemic 
failures at ACS. DOI takes care to assess which complaints are serious and credible 
before requesting OCFS authorizations for those select cases. Even then, the built-in 
delay of the OCFS prior approval process means that DOI cannot properly assess the 
legitimacy or credibility of many of these complaints. DOI recognizes OCFS’s position 
that it takes seriously its obligations under the law and that OCFS seeks to  act in 
accordance with the law in making good -faith determinations about DOI’s access to 
ACS records. In DOI’s experience, however, OCFS often exercises its discretion in a 
manner more restrictive than intended or required by the applicable statutes, which 
ultimately hinders DOI’s ability to fulfill its legal oversight mandate  regardless of 
OCFS’s intentions. 
 
More fundamentally, OCFS routinely denies , limits, or delays DOI’s requests 
for records, acting as  the sole arbiter of whether DOI’s requests are “essential” to 
DOI’s investigations.
57 These denials , limitations, and delays  derail ongoing 
 
55 While this report focuses on child welfare investigations, SSL § 496 prevents DOI from getting 
access to records from the Justice Center for the Protection of People with Special Needs about 
several ACS facilities, including the juvenile detention centers. These records, too, are integral to 
DOI’s ability to provide comprehensive oversight to ACS. 
56 SSL § 496(l)-(m). 
57 OCFS stated in its response to a draft of this report that “it is aware of only one recent records 
request that has gone ungranted.” It is unclear how OCFS defines “ungranted,” and this report is 
replete with examples showing that OCFS’s denials are far more widespread, including those on 
pages 16 and 17 of this report. Moreover, OCFS’s practices often constructively deny DOI’s requests 
for records by, for example, authorizing access to records so narrowly as to impede meaningful 
investigation, requiring information from DOI that cannot be obtained without an authorization, or  
suggesting DOI seek records by other means that would be infeasible and inappropriate in the 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 16  
 
 
investigations. Even where OCFS approves a request, it often does so only if DOI 
agrees to provide it with confidential investigatory information, thereby 
compromising the integrity of DOI’s investigations and its independence. Further, 
OCFS’s responses are inconsistent; even when DOI submits similar requests for 
similar facts, OCFS’s responses have differed without rational basis. OCFS’s 
decisions often appear to reflect an unfortunate territoriality, as it pointedly reminds 
DOI in its authorization letter s of its “supervisory role over ACS” and its ability to 
withhold future authorizations if DOI does not comply with the terms of its 
authorizations. As discussed above, both OCFS and DOI serve distinct roles with 
respect to ACS, with neither organization designed to be answerable to the other. 
 
Again, these issues are not theoretical. To better explain the practical 
consequences of the authorization framework and how it hinders DOI’s child welfare 
related investigations, discussion of several practical examples from between 2023 
and 2026 is warranted: 
 
• Sexual Misconduct : DOI received two separate complaints  alleging that a 
particular ACS caseworker committed sexual misconduct towards minors who 
were part of their caseload. DOI requested access to unredacted records 
regarding one of those clients and the other children and families that were 
part of that caseworker’s caseload to determine whether the caseworker had 
victimized other children. OCFS denied the authorization and refused to grant 
DOI access to the requested information , despite DOI explaining t his factual 
context to OCFS. ACS would have been able to provide DOI with the requested 
records if OCFS had authorized their release. Since OCFS chose to deny DOI’s 
request, ACS was prohibited from doing so. 
 
In the same year, DOI received two separate complaints alleging that another 
ACS caseworker committed sexual misconduct towards clients who were part 
of their caseload. DOI requested access to the caseworker’s case files regarding 
both known clients and other children and families that were part of that 
caseworker’s caseload to determine whether the caseworker had victimized 
anybody else. Again, ACS was willing to provide DOI with the needed 
information but could only do so legally with an authorization from OCFS . 
OCFS denied the authorization and refused to grant DOI access to any of the 
requested information. After OCFS’s denial, DOI was able to confirm through 
other investigative means that there were additional victims on the ACS 
 
context of  a confidential independent investigation, including suggesting that ACS conduct 
investigations on DOI’s behalf.  
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 17  
 
 
caseworker’s caseload.58 This confirmed that the files to which DOI sought 
access contained essential information about additional instances of sexual 
misconduct that OCFS prevented DOI from investigating.  
 
In both denials, OCFS referenced the victims’ privacy as the basis for its 
decision. OCFS’s denials did not indicate that the victims were consulted 
before OCFS determined that their privacy interests should outweigh an 
investigation into the crimes allegedly committed against them. 
 
• Personal Misconduct : DOI has received multiple complaints about ACS 
employees who are alleged to have engaged in abuse or maltreatment of 
children in their personal lives, calling into question whether they should be 
permitted to work with children in their professional capacities at ACS.59 DOI 
requested authorizations to access the ACS records regarding these allegations 
to investigate whether the ACS employees engaged in conduct that should 
prevent them from interacting with children in their professional capacities. 
OCFS denied these auth orizations, stating: “An ACS employee or 
contractor/program provider employee being investigated in their professional 
capacity does not establish a need for DOI to review open child protective 
records pertaining to an individual’s contact with the child welfare system in 
their personal capacity.”   
 
• Physical Abuse : DOI received a complaint from the grandmother of a child 
placed in foster care alleging that the foster family was abusing the 
complainant’s grandchild, noting that her grandchild had visible injuries 
during visits with the grandmother. The grandmother d id not know the type 
or legal process of foster care placement, but she submitted a complaint to DOI 
describing the injuries she observed and asking DOI to pursue an investigation 
into potential foster care abuse. OCFS denied DOI’s request for the foster care 
records because DOI did not have the details about the foster care placement 
at the time of its request. Without these records, DOI could not determine the 
very details that had served as the basis for OCFS’s denial, thereby cutting off 
DOI’s ability to investigate the grandmother’s complaint.  
 
• Fraud: DOI received a credible complaint that an ACS contractor forged and 
submitted to a New York City Family Court more than sixty sets of falsified 
records. When DOI sought OCFS authorization to access and review all the 
 
58 While unique circumstances allowed DOI to identify these victims in this case, DOI cannot rely on 
these alternative methods routinely. DOI should have direct access to records, as explained in this 
report. 
59 DOI routinely recommends personnel actions to ACS as part of its investigations. 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 18  
 
 
contractor’s casework records to identify additional potential forgeries, OCFS 
denied the request.  
 
As these examples highlight, authorization requirements give OCFS a 
functional veto over DOI’s investigations within the core of its Charter -mandated 
authority, even in cases when ACS would otherwise be fully cooperative. This power 
is not consistent with DOI’s role as an independent oversight agency for ACS and does 
not serve the public’s interests. Moreover, the cases highlight the inherent conflict of 
interest in OCFS essentially determining which cases DOI can investigate when 
those investigations could reveal issues in programs that OCFS helps to manage. 
b. Laws that Prohibit DOI from Accessing Records 
 
The Laws: Two laws —SSL §§ 422(5)(a) and 427- a— impose outright bars on 
DOI’s ability to receive records related to allegations of child abuse or maltreatment 
where ACS staff deemed the allegations “unfounded” (not supported by a 
preponderance of the evidence, according to ACS staff) or where ACS diverted the 
allegations to its CARES program (as discussed above, an alternative to the 
investigative track that focuses on providing families with resources and support). 
 
SSL § 422(5)(a) seals all records associated with reports of child abuse or 
maltreatment if those reports are deemed unfounded by ACS. Although the law 
permits some exceptions, none apply to DOI; meaning DOI cannot obtain these 
records under any circumstances. This result is peculiar given the nature of several 
of those exceptions. For example, the law recognizes the importance of documents 
related to unfounded reports for ACS caseworkers investigating sub sequent 
allegations of child abuse or maltreatment
60 and it permits OCFS to review 
documents related to prior unfounded child abuse or maltreatment reports during 
subsequent regulatory fatality reviews. 61 These exceptions provide ACS and OCFS 
with a more complete picture of family history to make informed conclusions during 
child abuse investigations. Yet DOI cannot access the same information when 
conducting similar, independent reviews.  
 
 
60 ACS instructs their caseworkers that it is critical to assess new allegations in the context of all 
previous allegations. Prior unfounded investigations must be considered as relevant when 
information from the prior unfounded investigation, combined with new information, shows a 
pattern that may contribute to abuse or maltreatment. Prior unfounded investigations may also be 
relevant to the new investigation if they provide evidence contrary to the new allegations.   See New 
York City Administration for Children’s Services, Division of Child Protection Casework Practice 
Requirements Manual – Fifth Edition (Dec. 2013); see also New York City, Administration for 
Children’s Services, CPS Review of Unfounded Cases (Dec. 1, 2013). 
61 SSL § 422(5)(a)(ii). 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 19  
 
 
Moreover, the law permits certain non-DOI law enforcement agents to review 
unfounded records when investigating whether a reporter made a false report of child 
abuse or maltreatment in violation of Penal Law § 240.50.62 The law does not permit 
DOI to access the same information to investigate the same allegation of false 
reporting, even where DOI is working with prosecutors who rely on DOI for pre-arrest 
investigative work. And, perversely, the law does not allow DOI to use the same 
information to investigate whether ACS personnel wrongly deemed a report 
unfounded even when there was credible evidence of abuse or maltreatment. 
Significantly, these scenarios come up regularly in complaints made to DOI by 
members of the pub lic about child abuse or maltreatment cases being allegedly 
mishandled by ACS, either due to incompetence, negligence, or criminal intent. Due 
to this prohibition, DOI is unable to respond to these complaints, either by pursuing 
appropriate action if the a llegations are confirmed or by confirming that ACS acted 
appropriately, thereby reassuring the public and restoring confidence in the agency.  
 
SSL § 427-a(5)(d) makes all records related to a child abuse or maltreatment 
case that has been diverted to the CARES program presumptively confidential and 
available only to enumerated entities. Again, DOI cannot obtain these records under 
any circumstances. And again, this is so despite the fact that the law recognizes the 
importance of the records for investigations into subsequent allegations of abuse or 
maltreatment; it expressly provides that records can be made available to “any social 
services district investigating a subsequent report of abuse or maltreatment involving 
the same subject or the same child or children named in the report.”
63   
 
 The Consequences: Perhaps the most glaring effect of the laws prohibiting DOI 
from accessing these categories of ACS records is that it insulates entire areas of 
ACS’s programs from the oversight that all City agencies expect of the programs that 
they operate. In recent years, ACS has increased its diversion of child abuse and 
maltreatment allegations to CARES, with 25% of incoming child protection cases  
diverted in 2024.
64 SSL § 427-a(5)(d) thus effectively shields up to a quarter of ACS’s 
child protective work from DOI’s oversight. DOI regularly receives complaints about 
ACS’s alleged mishandling of child abuse and maltreatment investigations from a 
variety of sources, including mandatory reporters, victims seeking help, members of 
the media,  concerned citizens, and from ACS itself . But, given the restrictions on 
DOI’s access to ACS information, DOI frequently cannot meaningfully investigate 
entire categories of cases, including: 
 
 
62 SSL § 422(5)(a)(v). 
63 SSL § 427-a(5)(a)(v). 
64 Press Release, Administration for Children’s Services Doubles Number of ‘CARES’ Units in Just 
Two Years, ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN’S SERVICES (Jan. 23, 2024), available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/acs/pdf/PressReleases/2024/number-of-cares-units-double.pdf.  
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 20  
 
 
• Investigations into Case Decisions : Because unfounded and diverted CARES 
case files cannot be reviewed by DOI, DOI cannot conduct investigations into 
whether decisions to unfound an allegation or divert a case to CARES were 
tainted by the criminality or incompetence of the ACS worker assig ned to 
handle the case. For example, DOI routinely investigates cases where City 
workers solicit bribes or extort clients in exchange for favorable outcomes in 
City services. However, if an ACS caseworker solicited a bribe from or extorted 
a family to find a report of child abuse unfounded, the entire case file related 
to that report would remain outside of DOI’s review. As another routine 
example, if an ACS caseworker falsified records stating that they conducted a 
safety check on an abused child and determined a report of child abuse or 
maltreatment to be unfounded, but the caseworker did not in fact visit the 
family, then the falsified records documenting the home visit would be 
insulated from DOI’s review and investigation. As currently written, the law 
allows abused children to fall through the cracks of two safety nets: the child 
welfare system and the agency responsible for its oversight. 
 
• Investigations into Case Handling : The sealing of unfounded and diverted 
CARES case files also insulates the conduct of individuals during an 
investigation or CARES case from review. For example, if an ACS caseworker 
makes sexual advances towards children during an investigation that the same 
caseworker eventually determines to be unfounded, records related to that 
investigation would be unavailable to DOI, even in the context of investigating 
the criminal sexual misconduct towards minors. And again, althou gh the law 
permits other law enforcement agencies to access unfounded case files during 
an investigation into whether a false report of child abuse or maltreatment was 
made to the SCR, DOI cannot access those same case files to conduct the same 
investigation even though DOI is charged with long -term and pre -arrest 
investigations and DOI often receives reports from the public about this type 
of false reporting. 
 
• Investigations into Fatalities : Under an agreement between DOI, ACS, and 
OCFS, ACS requests an OCFS authorization on DOI’s behalf when a child dies 
with an open child abuse or maltreatment case, or with a history of indicated 
child abuse or maltreatment cases in the past ten years. DOI is notified of the 
fatality if and when OCFS grants that request. Only then can DOI determine 
whether an independent investigation is warranted. Additionally, because DOI 
cannot access records related to unfounded or CARES ca ses, DOI does not 
receive the same notification if a child dies with a recent history of only 
unfounded child abuse or maltreatment allegations or CARES cases. As a 
result, DOI cannot evaluate child fatalities where children had recently 
encountered ACS, but where ACS  did not indicate any child abuse or where 
ACS diverted allegations to CARES programming. In those cases, DOI is 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 21  
 
 
blocked from investigating whether those crucial ACS decisions were made 
appropriately, or if staff misconduct, negligence, or systemic failures played a 
role. In 2023, ACS investigated forty -five child fatality cases, 65 but DOI was 
only notified of twenty -five of them, leaving twenty with no chance of 
independent oversight.  Disturbingly, the cases most in need of oversight, 
where a child dies after a history of unfounded ACS cases, have the least 
chance of independent review by DOI under current law. 
 
Even where DOI is notified of these fatalities and is aware of potential 
misconduct, lack of access to records often prevents DOI from exercising meaningful, 
comprehensive oversight. In 2025, DOI was notified of eighteen child fatalities where 
ACS had prior involvement with the family in the last decade, but seventeen had 
either unfounded or CARES history that DOI was barred from accessing. In 2024, 
that number was thirteen out of sixteen, and in 2023, it was nineteen out of twenty -
five. As a result, DOI is often forced to prematurely conclud e during an initial 
evaluation of a case that no meaningful investigation is possible given the severe 
state law  restrictions on its access to relevant records. This access restriction is 
particularly problematic because unfounded reports are exactly where one would 
expect to find lapses in ACS supervision or decision-making; as noted above, the law 
recognizes as muc h in granting ACS and OCFS the ability to review them in 
subsequent investigations. Nevertheless, DOI is hampered in its ability to determine 
either that lapses occurred or that they did not.  
 
The facts of some of the matters that go without DOI’s oversight are truly 
harrowing given the current state laws. None of the information detailed below was 
derived from  any information received from ACS or OCFS, and each piece of 
information is attributed solely to a publicly available news article or press release. 
Due to the access restrictions imposed by current state law, DOI has been unable to 
fully investigate, or sometimes investigate at all, whether ACS could have done more 
to protect the children at issue or whether policies and procedures could be 
strengthened to prevent future fatalities:
66 
 
• Brian Santiago 67: In August 2024, the New York Post  reported that the 
bodies of ten -year-old Brian Santiago and his mother were found in their 
 
65 New York City Administration for Children’s Services, Systemic Child Fatality Review - 2023 
Annual Report, available at https://www.nyc.gov/assets/acs/pdf/data-analysis/2023/annual-child-
fatality-report.pdf. 
66 No inference should be drawn from any statement or description of the publicly reported events in 
this report that unfounded or CARES cases did or did not exist regarding any of the individual 
children named below. 
67 Reporting summarized in this paragraph is found in the following article: Georgett Roberts et al., 
Neighbors ‘Shocked’ by Likely Starving Death of Disabled NYC Boy Who Was Returned to His Mom, 
Demand ACS ‘Do Better’, THE NY POST (Aug. 16, 2024), available at 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 22  
 
 
apartment. According to the news report, Brian’s mother was “investigated 
by the ACS and even had her son temporarily removed from her care at 
some point before she died, leaving her special -needs boy, who used a 
feeding tube, to likely starve to death.” If the press reporting on these ACS 
interactions is accurate, DOI has been unable to assess whether those 
earlier interactions could have led to interventions that may  have saved 
Brian's life.  
 
• Joseph Heben, Jr. 68: In November 2024, The New York Times and 
silive.com reported that in July 2024, one-month-old Joseph Heben, Jr. died 
of severe malnutrition. The child’s parents were both charged with murder 
and their prosecutions are ongoing.  To the extent Joseph’s family had any 
interactions with ACS prior to his death that were unfounded or handled 
as CARES cases, DOI has no ability to investigate those interactions under 
current state law. 
 
• Nazier Millien
69: In April 2025, the New York Post reported that eight-year-
old Nazier Millien, who had a feeding tube, died in his home after his 
mother died, likely leaving him to starve to death ; Nazier’s younger, four-
year-old sister survived for days by eating chocolate. The New York Post 
further described that in the days before the bodies were discovered, both 
the New York Police Department (NYPD) and ACS  allegedly “knocked on 
the family’s door – but simply walked away.” 70 The New York Post also 
 
https://nypost.com/2024/08/16/us-news/neighbors-shocked-by-death-of-disabled-boy-demand-acs-
do-better/.   
68 Reporting summarized in this paragraph is found in the following articles: Hurubie Meko & Mark 
Bonamo, Starvation Death of 1-Month-Old on Staten Island Is Rule a Homicide, THE NEW YORK 
TIMES (Nov. 6, 2024), available at https://nypost.com/2025/04/19/us-news/nyc-mom-son-found-dead-
inside-squalid-bronx-apartment-cops/; Kyle Lawson, Hours After Staten Island baby’s death, cops 
spoke with parents at hospital. Footage played in court, SILIVE.COM (Jan. 10, 2026), available at 
https://www.silive.com/crime-safety/2026/01/hours-after-staten-island-babys-death-cops-spoke-with-
parents-at-hospital-footage-played-in-court.html.  
69 Reporting summarized in this paragraph is found in the following articles: Marie Pohl et al., NYC 
mom, son found dead inside squalid Bronx apartment – where 4-year-old girl was subsisting on 
chocolate to survive: sources, THE NY POST (Apr. 19, 2025), available at https://www.silive.com/crime-
safety/2026/01/hours-after-staten-island-babys-death-cops-spoke-with-parents-at-hospital-footage-
played-in-court.html; Georgett Roberts et al., Here’s how NYC’s child services agency is failing 
innocent kids, with sometimes deadly results: ‘Doesn’t have to come to this’, THE NY POST (May 4, 
2025), available at https://nypost.com/2025/05/04/us-news/heres-how-nycs-child-services-agency-is-
failing-innocent-kids-with-sometimes-deadly-results-doesnt-have-to-come-to-this/.  
70 Reporting summarized in this paragraph is found in the following article: Georgett Roberts et al., 
Here’s how NYC’s child services agency is failing innocent kids, with sometimes deadly results: 
‘Doesn’t have to come to this’, THE NY POST (May 4, 2025), available at 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 23  
 
 
reported that in 2021, Nazier’s mother was arrested on “child abandonment 
charges after she was caught acting erratically, swinging her then infant 
daughter around in a stroller and lighting a wig on fire in front of a 
commercial strip,” but the case was sealed.  To the extent Nazier’s family 
had any interactions with ACS prior to his death that were unfounded or 
handled as CARES cases, DOI has no ability to investigate those 
interactions under current state law.  
 
• De’Neil Timberlake
71: In July 2024, the New York Post and the New York 
Daily News  reported that five -year-old De’Neil Timberlake died from 
methadone intoxication after De’Neil reportedly ingested his father’s 
methadone. According to the news reports, when police arrived at De’Neil’s 
apartment, they found “him foaming at the mouth.” The  news articles 
describe that the  NYPD alleged that De’Neil’s father was a “methadone 
user with a long history of child neglect cases.” It was  further reported in 
the news  that the family’s ACS history included “nine investigations –  
including educational neglect and inadequate guardianship, among others.” 
If this reporting is accurate and any of the  ACS investigations that 
allegedly occurred were unfounded or handled through CARES, DOI would 
be prohibited from reviewing and analyzing  records of those ACS 
investigations under current state law.   
 
• Jelayah Eason
72: According to a post-indictment press release by the Bronx 
County District Attorney and news reports from The New York Times and 
 
https://nypost.com/2025/05/04/us-news/heres-how-nycs-child-services-agency-is-failing-innocent-kids-
with-sometimes-deadly-results-doesnt-have-to-come-to-this/.  
71 Reporting summarized in this paragraph is found in the following stories: Annika Pergament, A 
closer look into the city’s Administration for Children’s Services, SPECTRUM NEWS NY 1 (Oct. 28, 
2024), available at https://ny1.com/nyc/all-boroughs/public-safety/2024/10/29/a-closer-look-inside-the-
city-s-administration-for-children-s-services; Amanda Woods et al., NYC boy, 5, found foaming at the 
mouth had methadone in system, father has history of neglect cases: cops , THE NY POST (Jul. 17, 
2024), available at https://nypost.com/2024/07/17/us-news/nyc-boy-5-found-foaming-at-mouth-had-
methadone-in-system-father-has-history-of-neglect-cases-cops/; Rocco Parascandola & Elizabeth 
Keogh, Boy, 5, found dead in Bronx apartment had methadone in his system, cops, THE NY DAILY 
NEWS (Jul. 17, 2024), available at https://www.nydailynews.com/2024/07/17/boy-5-found-dead-in-
bronx-apartment-had-methadone-in-his-system-cops-say/. 
72 Information summarized in this paragraph is found in the following sources: Press Release, Bronx 
Mom Indicted in Murder of 6-Year-Old Daughter; Hanged Her in Closet and Beat Her, BRONX 
COUNTY DISTRICT ATTORNEY’S OFFICE (May 28, 2024), available at 
https://www.bronxda.nyc.gov/downloads/pdf/pr/2024/41-2024%20Lynija-Eason-indicted-murder-6-
year-old-daughter.pdf; Annika Pergament, Three months after 6-year-old’s death, her body remains 
in a city morgue, SPECTRUM NEWS NY 1 (Aug. 28, 2022), available at 
https://ny1.com/nyc/bronx/public-safety/2023/08/22/three-months-after-6-year-old-s-death--her-body-
remains-in-a-city-morgue-?utm_source=chatgpt.com; Erin Nolan, Bronx Woman Charged with 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 24  
 
 
NY1, i n May 2023, six -year-old Jelayah Eason died . The New York City 
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner ruled that the cause of death was child 
abuse. According to news reports, Jelayah’s mother allegedly caused her 
daughter’s death by “hanging her by her wrists in a closet of their home and 
repeatedly striking her with a hard object.” According to the publicly 
available records, w hen police entered the apartment, they found soiled 
clothing and rotting food. Jelayah’s mother was charged with her murder 
and the prosecution is ongoing. 
 
According to NY1, in March 2023, ACS substantiated a “claim that the 
children were left home alone,” and the children were last seen by ACS in 
early May, just before Jelayah’s death. Additional press reporting stated 
that Jelayah’s mother was the subject of an ACS unfounded child abuse or 
maltreatment investigation in 2022, after it was alleged that Jelayah’s 
older brother was seen at school with a  bruised and swollen face and told 
his teacher that his mother kicked and punched him. If this reporting is 
accurate and there w as in fact an ACS investigation in 2022 that was 
unfounded or handled through CARES, DOI would be prohibited from 
reviewing and analyzing those records under current state law. 
 
• The Merdy Children
73: According to a post-indictment press release by the 
Kings County District Attorney and news reports by NY1, the New York 
Post, and the New York Daily News, i n September 2022, seven -year-old 
Zachary Merdy, four- year-old Liliana Stephens Merdy, and three- month-
old Oliver Bandarev died after their mother allegedly brought them to the 
beach near their home in Coney Island and drowned them. According to 
these publicly available sources, t he NYPD found the two older children 
“lying on the shoreline unresponsive, wet, and with sand on their bodies.” 
The children’s mother was charged with the children’s murders and her 
prosecution is ongoing.   
 
According to the  press reports , Zachary’s father reported that after a 
mandated visit, the child’s mother would hand Zachary over “dirty and 
 
Murder in Death of Her 6-Year-Old Daughter, THE NEW YORK TIMES (Apr. 26, 2024), available at 
https://www.nytimes.com/2024/04/26/nyregion/bronx-mother-charged-chid-death.html.  
73 Press Release, Brooklyn Mother Indicted for Killing her Three Children, KINGS COUNTY DISTRICT 
ATTORNEY’S OFFICE (Oct. 6, 2022), available at https://www.brooklynda.org/2022/10/06/brooklyn-
mother-indicted-for-killing-her-three-children/; Corey Kilgannon & Chelsia Rose Marcius, Children’s 
Drownings Mark the End of a Mother’s Descent, THE NEW YORK TIMES (Sept. 18, 2022), available at 
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/09/18/nyregion/coney-island-drownings-children-mother.html; 
Hurubie Meko & Chelsea Rose Marcius, Father Says He Sought Custody Before 3 Children Drowned 
in Brooklyn, THE NEW YORK TIMES (Sept. 16, 2022), available at 
https://www.nytimes.com/2022/09/12/nyregion/three-children-dead-coney-island.html.  
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 25  
 
 
hungry” and Zachary also told his father that his mother “makes [him] 
starve.” Zachary’s father told the media that “it didn’t matter how much 
[he] called child protective services. They would tell [him], ‘Oh, you don’t 
have any real evidence.’ But they didn’t do a real investigation.” Despite the 
reportedly sincere concerns of Zachary’s father described in the news, if any 
of the ACS investigations that Zachary’s father alleges took place actually 
occurred and were unfounded or handled through CARES, DOI would be 
prohibited from reviewing and analyzing those records under current state 
law. 
 
• Jah’Meik Modlin
74: According to a post-indictment press release by the New 
York County District Attorney and news reports by T he New York Times, 
four-year-old Jah’Meik Modlin died in June 2024, reportedly from child 
abuse including starvation and neglect. Jah’Meik’s parents allegedly 
“actively starved their children for approximately two years while 
purchasing food for themselves on a daily basis. T he apartment had a 
working refrigerator that contained fresh produce but was turned so that 
the door was facing the wall and could not be opened. Any cabinet 
containing food had a zip tie on the handle.” Additionally, according to the 
publicly available news sources,  the walls in one of the bedrooms was 
reportedly “smeared with feces the approximate height of a child” and was 
the only room in the apartment with an outside lock. At the time of his 
death, Jah’Meik weighed only approximately 19 pounds, had almost no 
body fat, and suffered from malnutrition, dehydration, and starvation. 
Ultimately, Jah’Meik’s parents were charged with his murder and their 
prosecution is ongoing 
 
The press articles further reported that Jah’Meik’s parents were  the 
“subject of no less than four ACS neglect reports since 2019 –  yet were 
allowed to retain custody of the boy  and his three siblings.” The press also 
reported that the family had a 2022 ACS case that was closed as unfounded 
because ACS did not find sufficient evidence that the children were being 
maltreated and that the family had a 2020 ACS case that was closed as 
unfounded wherein the parents were al legedly using drugs around the 
children and inadequately supervising their children. To the extent  this 
 
74 Press Release, Parents of 4-Year-Old Jahmeik Modlin Indicted for Murder, MANHATTAN DISTRICT 
ATTORNEY’S OFFICE (Nov. 6, 2024), available at https://manhattanda.org/d-a-bragg-parents-of-4-year-
old-jahmeik-modlin-indicted-for-murder/; Andy Newman, a 4-Year-Old Starved to death at Home. 
How were the Signs Missed?, THE NEW YORK TIMES (Oct. 23, 2024), available at 
https://www.nytimes.com/2024/10/23/nyregion/jahmeik-modlin-dead-nyc-acs.html; Andy Newman, 
Aunt of 4-Year-Old Who Starved to Death is Suing Child-Welfare Agency, THE NEW YORK TIMES (Oct. 
24, 2024), available at https://www.nytimes.com/2024/10/24/nyregion/child-death-harlem-acs-
lawsuit.html. 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 26  
 
 
press reporting is accurate  and there was in fact a prior unfounded ACS 
investigation, DOI would be prohibited from reviewing and analyzing those 
records under current state law.  
 
  ACS’s response to the Jah’Meik Modlin case is noteworthy to exemplify the 
need for DOI’s independent oversight in these critical matters. Then -ACS 
Commissioner Jess Dannauser testified before the New York City Council about 
Jah’Meik’s death, stating that the agency was assembling a multidisciplinary expert 
panel
75 to assess what could have been done differently.76 Additionally, in a television 
interview, Commissioner Danhausser said that ACS would conduct an in- depth 
review of the case to identify polic ies, practices, and services that could be 
strengthened, but wants ACS to “understand all the facts of this case before we 
publish any results.” 77 To date, ACS has not published any findings from the 
multidisciplinary expert panel or its in-depth review. Historically, ACS has published 
very little about details of cases like these, stating that legal restrictions, 
confidentiality, and the privacy interests of the decedent’s surviving siblings prevent 
additional disclosure.78  
 
 By contrast, even limited by the access restrictions discussed above, DOI has 
a history of bringing important issues in ACS’s handling of child welfare matters to 
the public’s attention, while recommending changes for ACS to address those issues. 
In 2007, DOI worked jointly with ACS to review eleven child fatalities after reports 
of abuse or maltreatment. 79 Because DOI partnered with ACS, it could review 
unfounded cases. In its investigation, DOI determined that “ACS staff often closed 
cases as ‘unfounded’ when little or no investigation had been conducted” and even 
“often closed cases as ‘unfounded’ after t heir investigation had substantiated the 
factual allegations of the report.”
80 DOI’s review resulted in twenty -six 
 
75 Notably, this panel would not include DOI representation. 
76 ACS Testimony to New York City Council Committees on Finance & Children and Youth (May 19, 
2025), available at https://legistar.council.nyc.gov/Calendar.aspx. 
77 ‘Heartbreaking’: ACS responds to 4-year-old Harlem boy’s death, PIX11 (Oct. 31, 2024), available at 
https://pix11.com/news/morning/heartbreaking-acs-responds-to-concerns-over-4-year-old-harlem-
boys-death/.  
78 Spectrum News Staff, Full interview: ACS commissioner on agency changes, SPECTRUM NEWS NY 1 
(Apr. 24, 2023), available at https://ny1.com/nyc/all-boroughs/public-safety/2023/04/23/full-interview-
-acs-commissioner-on-agency-changes. 
79 Rose Gill Hearn, DOI & John B. Mattingly, ACS, A Department of Investigation Examination of 
Eleven Child Fatalities and One Near Fatality (Aug. 2007), available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/reports/pdf/2007/2007-08-09-Acsreport_pdfaug.pdf. 
80 Id. at 89. 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 27  
 
 
recommendations to improve ACS’s case handling. 81 In 2016, DOI concluded an 
investigation into two child fatality cases and one near -fatality case that resulted in 
five more recommendations. 82 During this investigation, DOI  “did not have access 
to[] ‘unfounded’ records,” but nevertheless gathered circumstantial evidence that 
“raise[d] questions regarding the thoroughness of ACS’s [] investigation[s] and how 
many other children are left in unsa fe homes because of inadequate ACS 
investigation practice.”83 The following year, DOI investigated ACS’s response to 
additional allegations of abuse and neglect and issued nine more recommendations.84  
 
But as there continue to be unfounded investigations and the volume of cases 
diverted to CARES grows annually, the kind of oversight that DOI has long provided 
to ACS—for the betterment of the children ACS protects —becomes more difficult. 
Removing DOI’s access restrictions would allow DOI to continue to help ACS protect 
New York City’s children and would also allow DOI to bring ACS personnel who 
violate the law at the expense of children’s safety to justice. 
V. The Effect and Importance of State Legislation
 to Amend the SSL 
 
DOI has spent years negotiating with OCFS leadership to improve the process 
by which DOI seeks and receives OCFS authorization for records. OCFS has 
repeatedly stated that it is simply following its legal obligations and that it does not 
wish to obstruct or delay DOI’s work. For example, in many conversations about the 
inefficiencies, obstacles, and conflicts of interest in the authorization process, OCFS 
executive staff have stated they do not wish to “stand in the shoes of DOI”  when 
determining what records are essential to DOI’s work, nor do they want to undermine 
DOI’s ability to direct its own investigative process. However, OCFS’s statements 
have not resulted in tangible improvements; to the contrary, the authorization 
process has become more burdensom e over time, even in cases where ACS itself 
referred the initial allegations to DOI and is cooperating with the investigation. Many 
of DOI’s investigations continue to be delayed by months of negotiations and stymied 
by OCFS decisions not to authorize access to crucial records. A legislative change that 
 
81 Id. at 117-29. DOI’s investigation came at the request of then-ACS Commissioner John Mattingly, 
who understood that practices needed to be improved. Annika Pergament, How the city’s 
Administration for Children’s Services communicates with the public when an at-risk child dies, 
SPECTRUM NEWS NY1 (Apr. 24, 2023), available at https://ny1.com/nyc/all-
boroughs/news/2023/04/21/how-the-acs-communicates-when-an-at-risk-child-dies. 
82 Mark G. Peters, Report on ACS Policy and Practice Violations Identified in Three Child Welfare 
Cases and Related Analysis of Certain Systemic Data (Apr. 2016), available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/press-releases/2016/may/14-ACSReport05-03-16_FINALwReport.pdf. 
83 Id. at 14 & n.36. 
84 Mark G. Peters, Summary of DOI’s Investigation of the City Administration for Children’s Services’ 
Response to Abuse and Neglect Allegations Related to Jaden Jordan  (Jan. 26, 2017), available at 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doi/press-releases/2017/jan/05ACSstmt01-26-2017.pdf. 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 28  
 
 
removes the need for OCFS to authorize DOI’s access to records is necessary to ensure 
independent oversight. Moreover, the only solution to DOI’s lack of access to records 
related to unfounded and CARES cases is legislative. Because the complete 
restriction is currently written into law, the law needs to be amended to remove the 
restriction. 
 
Assemblymember Andrew Hevesi has introduced legislation (A.8248A) that 
would eliminate each of the five legal barriers to DOI’s investigations discussed 
above, and Senator Brisport has introduced legislation (S.8205) that would eliminate 
four of the barriers. Specifically, the legislation would: 
 
• Amend SSL § 372(4) to add DOI to the list of entities that are entitled to access 
confidential records relating to foster care and juvenile detention without the 
need for OCFS approval; 
 
• Amend SSL § 422(4)(m) to remove the requirement that DOI receive prior 
approval from OCFS before receiving access to records related to reports made 
pursuant to the Child Protective Services title of the social services law; 
 
• Amend SSL § 422(5)(a) to authorize DOI to access unfounded reports of abuse 
or maltreatment for the purpose of investigating an allegation of an improperly 
conducted investigation by ACS or falsely reporting an incident; 
 
• Amend SSL § 427-a(5)(d) and (e) to authorize DOI to access CARES records;
85 
and 
 
• Amend SSL § 496(2)(m) to remove the requirement that DOI receive prior 
approval before receiving access to records related to reports made pursuant 
to the Protection of People with Special Needs title of the social services law. 
 
DOI supports this proposed legislation wholeheartedly. 
 
DOI is aware of the body of work by academics and advocates explaining the 
sometimes-traumatizing effects child protective service investigations can have on 
families.
86 But DOI’s mission to investigate City agencies, employees, and vendors 
for criminality, misconduct, corruption, and systemic failures will not lead to a re -
 
85 This amendment is not included in the bill currently introduced by Senator Brisport.  
86 See, e.g., Daniella Rohr & Melissa Friedman, Overreporting and Investigation in the New York City 
Child Welfare System: A Child’s Perspective, 15 Colum. J. of Race and Law 1160 (2025); Christina N. 
Schmidt, et al., Widespread Surveillance by the Child Protection System: Lasting Effects on Families , 
11 Am. J. on Pub. Health e1 (Dec. 2021); Daniel Moritz-Rabson, ‘Never Designed To Help’: How New 
York’s Child Welfare’ System Preys on Families, NEW YORK CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (May 16, 2023). 
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 29  
 
 
investigation of families where allegations of child abuse or maltreatment were 
properly determined to be unfounded. Rather, DOI’s investigations will ensure that 
ACS receives the oversight necessary to ensure that its workers handle cases 
appropriately. I f an ACS child abuse or maltreatment investigation is improperly 
unfounded or was inappropriately diverted to CARES, that necessarily means that 
child abuse or maltreatment is being left unaddressed and a child is left unsafe. Such 
an outcome does not prioritize child safety or children under the care of ACS. And, if 
DOI can provide comprehensive recommendations to ACS on ways to improve their 
handling of child welfare investigations, it may reduce the risk that those 
investigations are handled in manners t hat are traumatizing in the first instance.  
The same laws that hamper DOI’s criminal investigations also prevent DOI from 
conducting policy reviews to assess allegations of systemic unfairness, such as racial 
disparities, in the child welfare system and to  offer recommendations on how to 
improve them. 
  
DOI is not the first law enforcement body to recognize this need for legislative 
change. As a Suffolk County Supreme Court Special Grand Jury wrote in a 2024 
report about the impact of the current confidentiality laws on the ability of law 
enforcement to investigate mishandled  child abuse allegations preceding a child’s 
death: “[T]hose laws and rules, intended to protect the privacy rights of individuals, 
have had the unintended consequence of shielding an entire agency, its leadership, 
and its hundreds of employees, from criminal investigation and prosecution. If the 
government is to be held accountable, that must not be the case.”
87 
 
Previous amendments to the SSL support the legislative goal of increasing 
ACS’s disclosure of information, particularly with respect to fatality investigations. 
The Child Protective Services Reform Act of 1996, i.e., Elisa’s Law, was enacted after 
six-year-old Elisa Izquierdo was murdered by her mother in 1995, despite the fact 
that her mother was well -known to child welfare authorities who had not acted on 
multiple reports of Elisa’s abuse.88 Prior to Elisa’s death, ACS’s predecessor agency 
had unfounded numerous investigations into Elisa’s abuse. Documents later revealed 
 
87 Suffolk County Supreme Court Special Grand Jury, September 14, 2023 – March 14, 2024 Term E 
Grand Jury Report CPL § 190.85(1)(c) at 60 (Mar. 12, 2024), available at 
https://www.suffolkcountyda.org/wp-content/uploads/Final_GJ_Report_On_CPS_4.3.24_MG_-
_small.pdf; see also id. at 12 (“evidence of willful misconduct or gross negligence by caseworkers 
contained within reports deemed unfounded is effectively impossible to obtain by prosecuting 
authorities”). 
88 Raymond Hernandez, Law to Ease Disclosures on Child Abuse, THE NEW YORK TIMES (Feb. 13, 
1996), available  at  https://www.nytimes.com/1996/02/13/nyregion/law-to-ease-disclosures-on-child-
abuse.html; Jo Craven McGinty, State Keeps Death Files of Abused Children Secret, THE NEW YORK 
TIMES (Feb. 28, 2012), available at https://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/29/nyregion/nys-evades-
requirement-for-disclosure-on-childrens-deaths.html (outlining the aim of Elisa’s Law, and OCFS’s 
attempts to reverse the reforms).    
Access Denied: Challenges to DOI’s Oversight of the City’s Welfare System    May 2026 
 
NYC Department of Investigation | 30  
 
 
that child welfare workers had not reviewed these critical past reports when 
reviewing subsequent abuse allegations. 89 The Legislature found that the laws 
“which bar legitimate and appropriate inquiries about the activities of such agencies” 
and “impair the ability of independent government agencies to determine the 
effectiveness of services, staff and funding; corrode public trust; and undermine the 
right o f the public to determine whether abused children are being adequately 
protected.”
90 As a result, the Legislature increased the degree of permissible 
disclosure of child welfare information so that ACS and other child welfare agencies 
would be more accountable to the public and its vulnerable children. But, these 
amendments did not address DOI’s access to the same records. As a result, if Elisa’s 
death were to happen today, just like the above- mentioned child fatality examples, 
DOI would not be able to access unfounded investigations, severely limiting its ability 
to conduct a thorough investigation int o her death and whether ACS could have 
prevented it. Passage of the legislation further amending the SSL would correct that 
problem before additional children fall in harm’s way. 
VI. Conclusion 
 
Several provisions of the SSL have hampered DOI’s ability to meaningfully 
investigate critically important aspects of ACS’s work to protect New York City’s 
vulnerable children. From criminal investigations into whether ACS caseworkers 
sexually abused child ren during their casework to programmatic reviews into 
whether ACS could improve its processes for determining whether allegations of child 
abuse should be substantiated or not, the SSL restricts DOI’s access to records that 
would enable the kind of  oversight that DOI provides to virtually every other City 
agency. Simply put, these laws leave the City’s children less safe, and they should be 
amended so that DOI can carry out its New York City Charter- mandated 
responsibility to provide oversight to ACS as it conducts its important work.
91 
 
 
89 Douglas J. Besharov, Ignoring the Danger Signs of Child Abuse, NEWSDAY (Apr. 21, 1996).   
90 Elisa’s Law, Child Protective Services Reform Act, 1996 NY Laws S. 5959-A §1 (1996). 
91 A draft of this report was provided to ACS and OCFS for comment. ACS and OCFS provided 
comments, which DOI considered when finalizing this report. 