TITLE: False Choice
URL: https://cbcny.org/research/false-choice
ISSUED: 2026-03-11
PDF: https://cbcny.org/sites/default/files/media/files/CBCREPORT_False-Choices_NYC-FY27-Prelim_03112026_0.pdf

REPORT  CITY BUDGET
False Choice
The NYC Fiscal Year 2027 Preliminary Budget
Press Release
Download Report
Print
Share
EXPAND TABLE OF CONTENTS
March 11, 2026
Content
Executive Summary
Overview of the Preliminary Budget
The City Faces a $9.4 Billion Budget Gap, After Including Updated Revenue and Accurate Spending Forecasts
Gap Closing is Heavily Reliant on a Tax Increase and Nonrecurring Resources
State Aid Provides $1.6B in Fiscal Years 2026 and 2027
Insufficient Savings and Missed Opportunities
Workforce Growth and Management
Fiscal Risks and the Long-Term Outlook
Recommendations
Conclusion
Executive Summary

CBC applauds Mayor Zohran Mamdani for presenting a Preliminary Budget based on a much more credible accounting of the City’s fiscal position than recent plans. This budget reveals just how much City spending has ballooned and highlights the large and growing structural gap between revenues and expenses. 

The budget’s improved accuracy and transparency are key. Knowing the problem is a precursor to devising a solution. But we must be clear: Underbudgeting did not cause the City’s fiscal problem—it merely masked it. The cause is unaffordable spending—layering on new and expanded programs without making them affordable by shrinking spending that does not improve New Yorkers’ lives or streamline government.

To close next year’s gap, the budget relies heavily on one-shot resources and tax increases that weaken the city’s competitiveness, while failing to catalyze sufficient recurring savings needed to stabilize the City’s finances. Furthermore, significant risks could destabilize the budget, including an optimistic revenue forecast combined with a historically slim budget cushion, and insufficient reserves for a recession.

The budget presents a false choice between raising personal and business income taxes, which would make New York less competitive, or raising the property tax and raiding reserves, which would make it more expensive and increase New Yorkers’ risk of suffering in a recession. The State Senate and Assembly one-house budgets propose to increase business taxes in the City, which the Governor should reject.

None of these paths are right. The smart choice in each instance is to restrain spending and protect reserves. The Mamdani Administration should scrutinize large programs and drill into agency budgets to eliminate wasteful spending, improve efficiency, and focus programs so government can deliver high-quality essential services that remain affordable over time. Executive Order 12 sets the right direction, but the Administration should be as ambitious in its efforts to improve government as it is in its efforts to improve affordability.

The State may well provide additional aid to the City, as the legislative budgets propose. However, such aid needs to consider the State’s precarious finances. It could be appropriate as a bridge to a fiscally responsible City budget, as long as it is conditioned on a City plan to become fiscally sustainable and effective.

CBC’s analysis found: 

The City’s budget has ballooned far faster than inflation. Fiscal year 2026 spending is $16 billion higher than if it had grown at the rate of inflation since fiscal year 2017.
Spending has also now grown faster than the revenue that supports it. Between fiscal years 2021 and 2025, City funded spending (adjusted for prepayments) grew 6.8 percent annually, outpacing the 5.2 percent annual growth in tax revenues. 
The City is on track to spend $5.8 billion more than it took in over four years. Current year expense obligations exceeded current year revenues by $636 million, $1.1 billion, and $610 million, in fiscal years 2023 through 2025, respectively. Fiscal year 2026 expense obligations are projected to exceed revenues by $3.5 billion. (See Figure 1.)
The combined fiscal year 2026 and 2027 budget gap totals $9.4 billion, after adjusting the last financial plan for the Administration’s updated revenue and more accurate spending forecasts. While the Administration increased the revenue forecast by $7.6 billion over fiscal years 2026 and 2027, its updated spending forecast added $12.3 billion.1
The tax increases under consideration would make the City less competitive and less affordable. Raising income taxes would make New York City less attractive to residents who pay a significant share of the costs of schools, sanitation and police. Raising business taxes would risk the city’s attractiveness to firms that create jobs and hire New Yorkers. Raising property taxes would make the City less affordable for owners, renters, businesses, and utility rate payers.
The proposed drawdown from the Revenue Stabilization Fund (“rainy day fund”) and Retiree Health Benefits Trust (RHBT) are one-shots that only close near-term gaps. Far from solving the problem, this strategy kicks the can down the road while leaving the City less prepared for a recession. 
The proposed savings are too small, just 2 percent of annual spending.2 The budget projects $710 million in savings in fiscal year 2026 and $1.1 billion in fiscal year 2027 and thereafter.

Given its dramatic spending growth and paucity of efficiency efforts, the City does not need to raise taxes—and it shouldn’t. Instead, the City should:

Reduce ineffective spending and improve operational efficiency, including relief from the State class size reduction mandate ($1 billion), consolidating union welfare funds ($200 million), and more within agency programs and by leveraging technology and eliminating redundant bureaucracy;
Right-size spending in areas where demand has changed, such as adjusting school funding to reflect declining enrollment ($400 million), and maintaining the number of FHEPS housing vouchers ($330 million); and
Protect reserves by maintaining the rainy day fund and RHBT and including $1 billion of in-year reserves to protect New Yorkers from economic downturns and unexpected fiscal shocks.
Overview of the Preliminary Budget

The Fiscal Year 2027 Preliminary Budget totals $126.4 billion. City-funded spending is $95.7 billion, up from $60.1 billion in fiscal year 2017, adjusted for prepayments. Had spending grown at the rate of inflation since fiscal year 2017, it would be $79.3 billion in fiscal year 2026—$16.4 billion lower. (See Figure 2.) 

The preliminary budget increased the tax revenue forecast by $7.6 billion across fiscal years 2026 and 2027, excluding $3.7 billion from the proposed property tax rate increase. While overall annual tax revenue growth rates, excluding the property tax increase, are within historical norms—5.0 percent in fiscal year 2026 and 4.2 percent in fiscal year 2027—they are driven by projected strength in personal income tax collections that may be optimistic. (See Figure 3.) After growing 17.6 percent between fiscal year 2024 and 2025, personal income tax collections are projected to grow another 10.1 percent in fiscal year 2026 and 4.7 percent in fiscal year 2027.

On the expense side, the budget largely corrected the rampant underbudgeting that had grown substantially under preceding administrations, an important and commendable choice. The budget adds nearly $12 billion of spending in fiscal years 2026 and 2027 to reflect the cost of current (and growing) service levels, including housing vouchers, legal mandates at the Department of Education, and other recurring commitments. 

The preliminary budget also includes:

A more accurate picture of City health insurance spending, with new costs associated with the Health Insurance Stabilization Fund that warrant more scrutiny.[i] Costs are projected to grow from $10.7 billion this fiscal year to $12.8 billion in fiscal year 2030. 
Modest funding to support Administration priorities, such as an expansion of immigration legal services, modular bathrooms, and additional Law Department staff.
Standard financial plan actions, such as writing down current year budgetary reserves, updating debt service and labor reserve projections, and reflecting prior year payables. 

These actions, combined with improved revenue projections and underbudgeting corrections, laid bare the City’s precarious fiscal condition. 

The City Faces a $9.4 Billion Budget Gap, After Including Updated Revenue and Accurate Spending Forecasts

In November 2025, fiscal year 2026 was presented as balanced and fiscal year 2027 had a $4.7 billion gap. This understated the City’s budget gap by $12 billion over two years due to rampant underbudgeting; the combined fiscal year 2026 and 2027 gaps were $16.6 billion. Once the City made typical updates to the financial plan, such as updating the tax revenue forecast, bringing down current-year budgetary reserves and adding new spending, the remaining gaps were $9.4 billion. This is the fiscal challenge Mayor Mamdani faced. 

Gap Closing is Heavily Reliant on a Tax Increase and Nonrecurring Resources

The City relies heavily on reserves and tax increases to close the budget gap. These include: $3.7 billion (39 percent) from the proposed property tax increase, $1.4 billion (14 percent) from dramatically lowering the fiscal year 2027 budgetary reserves, and $1.2 billion (13 percent) from the rainy day fund and the RHBT. (See Figure 4.)

The proposed property tax increase will make New York more unaffordable. Property tax revenue will increase by 14.0 percent in fiscal year 2027 because of higher assessed values, new and improved buildings, and the higher property tax rate. Homeowners will clearly feel this increase, but so will renters who may face higher rents or deferred maintenance. Commercial property owners typically pass property tax increases to tenants, who will likely pass the costs to their customers in the form of higher prices. Last, utility properties, which pay 8 percent of the City’s property tax, pass those costs to rate payers. 

Reserves are finite resources—using them to close the gap is inherently non-recurring, a one-shot that kicks the can down the road. Using $1 billion from the rainy day fund would temporarily paper over a recurring spending problem while weakening the City’s already insufficient fiscal resilience at the same time. 

The Retiree Health Benefits Trust is not a reserve, but a fund intended to accumulate resources against the City’s $102 billion other postemployment benefit (OPEB) liability. While the proposed drawdown is small, it is inappropriate.

While it is standard to draw down the general and capital stabilization reserves during the year, it is extremely rare to draw down the upcoming year’s budgetary reserves to a mere $100 million dollars—the statutory minimum set after the 1975 fiscal crisis. Over the last 25 years, the preliminary budget for the upcoming year has only included a $100 general reserve two other times—in fiscal year 2003 following 9/11 and a recession, and in fiscal year 2022, early in the COVID-19 pandemic. (See Figure 5.) 

The Administration has also suggested alternative tax increases—including a surcharge on high-income earners and higher business taxes—as another approach to closing budget gaps, supported by the State Legislature. They just add to the menu of false choices. Sustainable fiscal management should focus primarily on improving efficiency and controlling spending growth.

State Aid Provides $1.6B in Fiscal Years 2026 and 2027

The New York State Fiscal Year 2027 Executive Budget provided recurring and non-recurring State aid to New York City that helps close the short-term gap. The preliminary budget includes $1 billion in fiscal year 2026, $607 million in fiscal year 2027, $570 million in fiscal year 2028 and $457 million in fiscal year 2029 and thereafter. The State Senate and Assembly included additional one-time and recurring funding for the City.

Insufficient Savings and Missed Opportunities

The Preliminary Budget includes only about $1 billion in recurring annual savings, far below the level needed to put the City on a sustainable fiscal path. While the Administration’s efficiency initiative—Executive Order 12—points in the right direction, the savings targets are small, falling short of what is required and possible. Fiscal year 2027 savings are just 2.0 percent, when measured against relevant City funds.4

There hasn’t been a deep restructuring or productivity effort in New York City over the past 12 years; with rapid budget growth during that time there are opportunities for savings without service cuts. In contrast, private sector productivity increases by 2.2 percent a year on average.  The City has a significant opportunity to reimagine government operations, leverage technology, streamline processes, and eliminate ineffective programs.

The City should approach this with an eye towards significant changes that provide substantial savings and by digging into every agency’s operations. Just to start, CBC has identified areas that could provide over $2.6 billion of recurring savings even before drilling down into agencies:

Relief from the State class size reduction mandate could save approximately $1 billion annually;
Procurement reform could generate $700 million in savings by modernizing purchasing practices and improving competition;
Adjusting school funding to reflect declining enrollment could potentially save $400 million annually;
Preserving the number of CityFHEPS housing vouchers at its current level could save about $330 million per year; and
Consolidating union welfare funds could yield about $200 million in savings. 

Pursuing these and other efficiency measures would allow the City to control spending growth without raising taxes or drawing down reserves.

Workforce Growth and Management

Half of the City’s budget goes towards employee salaries and benefits. Effective fiscal management requires effective headcount management. That should not mean lengthy reviews and multiple approvals that slow hiring for needed positions. The Mamdani Administration has started to reduce bureaucratic hurdles to hiring and plans to reduce vacancies as part of the savings; now, the City needs to set its authorized headcount based on service needs and fiscal constraints. It should reduce the number of vacant positions—currently nearly 20,000 positions, including 16,000 full-time positions, are vacant—and then let agencies hire to fill those vacancies. 

Fiscal Risks and the Long-Term Outlook

Even after gap-closing actions in the Preliminary Budget, the City’s financial outlook remains precarious. The financial plan projects out-year gaps of $6.7 billion in fiscal year 2028, $6.8 billion in fiscal year 2029, and $7.1 billion in fiscal year 2030. 

At the same time, the City’s fiscal cushion is extremely limited. The fiscal year 2027 budget includes only $100 million in in-year reserves, just 0.1 percent of the total budget. Additionally, the rainy day fund will be reduced to about $1 billion, far too small to mitigate the effects of a significant economic downturn that would require $15 billion over two years. (See Figure 6.) This limited fiscal cushion is particularly concerning given the uncertainty surrounding federal funding and other external risks. Changes to federal programs—such as Medicaid funding or housing support—could create additional financial pressures for the City.

Recommendations

To place New York City on a sustainable fiscal path, CBC recommends that the City:

Reject tax increases that would harm the City’s economic competitiveness and place additional burdens on residents and businesses;
Reduce ineffective spending and improve operational efficiency, including spending on education, procurement, and administrative operations;
Right-size spending in areas where demand has changed, such as adjusting school funding to reflect declining enrollment and managing the growth of the FHEPS housing voucher program; and
Build and maintain adequate reserves by not drawing down the rainy day fund or RHBT and including $1 billion of in-year reserves, which will help protect the City against economic downturns and unexpected fiscal shocks, as well as strengthening the RSF by requiring mandatory deposits when the economy is growing and limiting withdrawals to a recession or severe emergency with unexpected expenses of revenue loss.
Conclusion

The New York City Fiscal Year 2027 Preliminary Budget provides a clearer view of New York City’s fiscal reality. While the budget is balanced in the near term, it relies heavily on tax increases, reserves, and other temporary measures rather than structural reforms.

New York City has the opportunity—and the responsibility—to address its fiscal challenges proactively. By prioritizing efficiency, eliminating ineffective spending, and rebuilding fiscal reserves, the City can strengthen its financial foundation and ensure that it remains able to provide essential services for years to come.

By Ana Champeny

Vice President for Research

By Chris Henrichson

Director of City Studies
NYC Budget Blueprint
9 Smart Choices to Improve Stability, Preparedness, and Services
Letter to Mayor Mamdani on How Best to Close the FY 2027 Budget Gap
To Weather a Storm
Create an NYC Rainy Day Fund
Download Report
False Choice: The NYC Fiscal Year 2027 Preliminary Budget (3.31 MB)
Footnotes
The net increase of $4.7 billion ($12.3 billion in net increases less $7.5 billion in higher tax revenue forecast), plus the pre-existing fiscal year 2027 gap of $4.7 billion gets a combined two-year gap of $9.4 billion.
City-funded spending excluding pensions, fringe benefits, debt services, Medicaid, and elected officials.
For more information on the Health Insurance Stabilization fund, see: Office of the New York City Comptroller, Audit of the Financial and Operating Practices of the Joint Health Insurance Stabilization Fund (December 30, 2025), https://comptroller.nyc.gov/reports/audit-of-the-financial-and-operating-practices-of-the-joint-health-insurance-stabilization-fund/, and Annual State of the City’s Economy and Finances 2025 (December 15, 2025), https://comptroller.nyc.gov/reports/annual-state-of-the-citys-economy-and-finances-2025/https://comptroller.nyc.gov/reports/annual-state-of-the-citys-economy-and-finances-2025/ ; and Office of the New York State Comptroller, Review of the Financial Plan of the City of New York (Report 18-2026, December 2025), https://www.osc.ny.gov/files/reports/osdc/pdf/report-18-2026.pdfhttps://www.osc.ny.gov/files/reports/osdc/pdf/report-18-2026.pdf.
 Excludes City-funded spending for pension contributions, fringe benefits, Medicaid, debt service, and elected officials, often referred to as the PEGable base.