more 
 
 
The City of New York 
Department of Investigation 
 
CHRISTOPHER RYAN 
ACTING COMMISSIONER 
180 MAIDEN LANE Release #05-2026 
NEW YORK, NY 10038 nyc.gov/doi 
212-825-5900  
  
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  CONTACT:   DIANE STRUZZI 
TUESDAY, MARCH 3, 2026 CLODAGH MCGOWAN 
 (212) 825-5931 
    
DOI ISSUES REPORT ON THE PUBLIC SAFETY RISK INVOLVING VACANT APARTMENTS IN THE 
NYC PUBLIC HOUSING AUTHORITY (“NYCHA”) AND FIVE RECOMMENDATIONS TO MITIGATE THESE RISKS, 
WHICH NYCHA HAS ACCEPTED 
 
Christopher Ryan, Acting Commissioner of the New York City Department of Investigation (“DOI”), issued a 
Report today on the public safety risks associated with the significant increase of vacant New York City Housing Authority 
(“NYCHA”) apartments, which rose from approximately 2,840 in January 2022 to 6,740 as of May 2025. The current 
average duration of a vacancy is approximately one year. A vacant apartment, for purposes of this Report, is defined as 
an apartment that has been vacated by the tenant(s) of record and is not the subject of a legal dispute involving a claim 
to reside in the apartment (such as a licensee or successor claim). Vacant apartments can be refurbished by NYCHA 
and then provided to a new tenant. Apartments that are involved in legal disputes must be officially vacated (i.e., no 
individual resides therein and any legal disputes  have been resolved) before they are deemed vacant and within 
NYCHA’s control to freely change the locks, inspect, refurbish, and make available for a new tenant. Because NYCHA’s 
control over such apartments is limited, the  Report focuses on vacant apartments, as defined above.  As detailed in the 
Report, vacant apartments, without adequate security measures, create opportunities for illegal occupancy by 
unauthorized individuals, some of whom use the apartments as a base for illegal activities. This Report describes 
conditions discovered in vacant apartments associated with suspected trespassing or other illegal activity and how to 
mitigate the public safety risks currently posed by vacancies. A copy of the Report  is attached to this release;  and can 
be found at this link: https://bit.ly/4qsqEBZ  
 
Acting DOI Commissioner Christopher Ryan said, “NYCHA apartments that sit vacant reduce the already limited 
availability of the City’s public housing stock, and without appropriate security measures, pose a public safety risk for 
public housing residents, employees and contractors. DOI ’s investigation found that NYCHA must do more to stop 
trespassing and other illegal activity in vacant apartments. The security deficiencies found heighten the risk of illegal 
occupancy in the thousands of unoccupied units. DOI’s recommendations are meant to strengthen NYCHA’s monitoring 
of its vacant apartments and reduce the opportunity for crime and other wrongdoing. I thank NYCHA and the N ew York 
City Police Department (“NYPD”) for its partnership  on this important issue, particularly as it relates to  reclaiming 
apartments and ridding them of illegal activity.”  
 
DOI found that the number and duration of vacancies  are due to various factors. These factors include: (1) an 
increase in transfers of tenants from one NYCHA apartment to another; (2) funding constraints that extend the time 
required to refurbish a vacant apartment; and (3) an increase in the number of vacant apartments that require lead 
abatement, due to a local law change lowering the permissible level of lead in lead-based paint. These issues increase 
both the number of vacancies and the length of time an apartment rema ins vacant—further limiting availability of the 
City’s precious public housing stock, for which there is a waitlist of 165,000 applicants. 
 
NYCHA, DOI, and the NYPD have worked collaboratively to recover possession of vacant apartments from 
unauthorized occupants . In total, from January 2022 to May 2025,  the NYPD reclaimed 548 apartments  from 
unauthorized occupants, 60 of which were reclaimed through joint efforts  by the NYPD and DOI. The joint reclamation 
efforts resulted in 81 arrests for an array of charges, including trespassing, criminal possession of a controlled substance, 
and criminal possession of a weapon, which pose a risk to the NYCHA community at large.  

 
2 
 
DOI found that the following factors contributed to the increase in vacant apartments and the length of those 
vacancies:  
 
• Lead and Asbestos Abatement Requirements : For apartments vacated appropriately, or reclaimed, 
NYCHA must comply with a number of requirements , principally relating to lead and asbestos testing and 
abatement, before undertaking the general construction work to refurbish and turnover the apartment . The 
prevalence of lead and asbestos in NYCHA apartments and the testing and abatement work required are 
significant drivers of the lengthy turnover process for NYCHA apartments.  
 
• Costs and Funding: The average cost to complete the turnover process is approximately $52,000 ($17,000 
for lead abatement, $25,000 for asbestos abatement, and $10,000 for general renovations, though those 
costs vary widely). While NYCHA receives City funding to aid with apartment turnover, NYCHA faces funding 
constraints related to the required renovation work (both lead and asbestos work and otherwise), which can 
further delay completion of that work.
 Together, these funding issues make it difficult, if not impossible, for 
NYCHA to materially reduce the length of time necessary to ready an apartment for rental. For that reason, 
it is particularly important that NYCHA take steps to improve the security of its vacant apartments during the 
lengthy turnover process. 
 
Based on its investigation, DOI identified the following areas in which NYCHA should improve its current security 
measures for vacant apartments: 
 
• Inspections: NYCHA does not proactively inspect vacant apartments to ensure that the unit is in fact vacant 
throughout the entirety of the apartment turnover cycle. The absence of regular inspections increases the 
risk that trespassing and other illegal criminal activity can occur undetected in the vacant apartment and 
heightens security risks to residents, employees, and contractors. It also delays the discovery of 
unauthorized occupants and the initiation of the recovery process.  NYCHA takes the position that staff 
responsible for renovating the vacant apartment can report any signs of unauthorized occupancy or other 
illegal activity that they observe in the course of renovation- related tasks, obviating the need for additional 
inspections. Reporting by such staff alone is insufficient.  
 
• Locks: Ensuring that a vacant apartment is properly secured is a critical measure to reduce the risk of 
unauthorized occupants, and potentially, related illegal activity.  NYCHA’s vacant units are especially 
vulnerable to trespassing because NYCHA procedure currently requires that NYCHA developments use the 
same lockset —and, thereby, the same key —for all vacant apartments within that particular  NYCHA 
development, presenting the risk that individuals could, upon acquiring a key, access any vacant unit in the 
development. In some instances, NYCHA employees deviate from the required practice and fit vacant units 
with a “65 key”—a generic lockset  used not only for vacant apartments in this instance, but also Authority -
wide for certain rooms within NYCHA buildings, including some utility spaces and management offices. That 
is, this occasional, unauthorized use of a 65 key creates additional risk because the keys can be used not 
only for vacant units but also other spaces within NYCHA.  
 
It is NYCHA’s position that using unique keys for each vacant unit poses significant operational challenges, 
because many different employees and contractors must access a vacant apartment during the renovation 
process. NYCHA’s policy poses an unacceptable risk of facilitating unauthorized occupancy and even 
criminal conduct in vacant units, particularly in light of the absence of regular apartment inspections.  
 
• Resident Involvement: NYCHA has a Resident Watch program that is empowered to patrol and report 
suspected unlawful activity. NYCHA should more actively and effectively engage this program to encourage 
reporting of suspected trespassing in vacant units.  
 
As a result of these findings, DOI issued the following five recommendations: 
 
1. The Authority should edit Standard Procedure, 040:22:2, Apartment Turnover, Monthly Building, and Other 
Maintenance Inspections, to require that Property Management conduct monthly inspections (e.g., check 
the windows and door locks, check for signs of unauthorized occupants - personal belongings, waste) in  
vacant apartments that are not ready for rental— i.e., units that have been vacated by the tenant(s) of record 
and are not the subject of a legal dispute, and thus can be inspected by NYCHA. During those inspections, 
Property Management should secure vacant apartments, ensuring operational window and door locks, to 
prevent trespassing. If Property Management discovers that there is/are (an) unauthorized individual(s) 
 
3 
during an inspection, the Property Management employee should immediately (no later than 72 hours after 
discovery) make a report to NYCHA’s Law Department.  
 
NYCHA accepts. NYCHA, however, states that it will need approximately one year to implement this 
recommendation, as NYCHA I nformation Technology will need to create new auto-generated work 
orders for these inspections.   
 
2. NYCHA should evaluate the feasibility of alternative locksets or security technologies, including electronic 
locks and keys. While studying these alternatives, NYCHA should edit Standard Procedure, 040:22:2, 
Apartment Turnover, Monthly Building, and Other Maintenance Inspections, to require that developments 
have multiple (a minimum of two or three, depending on the quantity of vacancies at a development) versions 
of move-out cylinders (and their related keys) to use on a rotating basis. This will reduce the number of 
apartments within a development that can be accessed by a single key. No two developments should use 
the same versions of keys. If NYCHA determines that an alternative lockset is feasible, then NYCHA should 
update the aforementioned Standard Procedure accordingly.  
 
NYCHA accepts.   
 
3. The Authority should edit Standard Procedure, 001:17:1, Resident Watch Guidelines, to require that 
Resident Watch volunteers report to the Resident Watch Supervisor any suspected unauthorized inhabitants 
or illegal activity in a  vacant apartment. The Resident Watch Supervisor should (1) inform Property 
Management of any such discoveries by the end of their shift and (2) include any such reports on their 
Quality of Life form. The Resident Watch should not take any action regarding these individuals other tha n 
reporting such apartments to Property Management. NYCHA should also train Resident Watch related to 
this requirement.  
 
NYCHA accepts
. NYCHA, however, states that it will need approximately six months to a year to 
implement the portion  of this recommendation  pertaining to the Quality of Life form , as NYCHA 
Information Technology will need to make an enhancement to said form. 
 
4. Upon receipt of such a report from the Resident Watch Supervisor, as described in recommendation 3 above, 
Property Management should immediately seek to confirm the information and, if verified, immediately (no 
later than 72 hours after discovery) make a report to NYCHA’s Law Department.  
 
NYCHA accepts. 
 
5. If/when the Authority receives additional funding for refurbishment of vacant apartments, NYCHA should 
deploy that funding so as to reduce the period of time necessary to complete refurbishment.  
 
NYCHA accepts, subject to funding. 
 
Acting DOI Commissioner Ryan thanked NYCHA CEO Lisa Bova- Hiatt and her staff for their cooperation and 
assistance during this investigation and NYPD Commissioner Jessica S. Tisch for her and her Department’s partnership 
on the joint apartment reclamation efforts.  
 
The investigation was conducted by  Assistant Inspectors General Enio Bencosme and Robert Joyce, Deputy 
Inspector General Gregory Deboer, and Deputy Counsel Lauren Kropiewnicki of DOI’s Office of the Inspector General 
for NYCHA, under the supervision of Inspector General Ralph Iannuzzi and Deputy Commissioner/Chief of Investigations 
Dominick Zarrella. 
 
DOI is one of the oldest law-enforcement agencies in the country and New York City’s corruption watchdog. Investigations 
may involve any agency, officer, elected official or employee of the City, as well as those who do business with or receive benefits 
from the City. DOI’s strategy attacks corruption comprehensively through systemic investigations that lead to high-impact arrests, 
preventive internal controls and operational reforms that improve the way the City runs. 
 
DOI’s press releases can also be found at twitter.com/NYC_DOI 
Know something rotten in City government? Help DOI Get the Worms Out of the Big Apple. 
Call: 212-3-NYC-DOI or email: Corruption@DOI.nyc.gov 
Report Title       Month and Year of Publication 
 
Department of Investigation | 1 
 
 
New York City 
Department of Investigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Christopher Ryan 
Acting Commissioner 
 
Ralph M. Iannuzzi  
Inspector General for NYCHA 
 
Lauren Kropiewnicki 
Deputy Counsel 
 
 
March 2026 
 
DOI’s Investigation  
Into the Reclamation of 
Vacant NYCHA Apartments  
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
I. Executive Summary ............................................................................................ 1 
II. Background ........................................................................................................... 5 
A. NYCHA’s Organization and Turnover of Vacant Apartments ........... 5 
B. Apartment Reclamation ............................................................................. 6 
C. Factors Contributing to the Increased Quantity and Duration of 
Vacancies .................................................................................................................. 7 
1. Lead and Asbestos Abatement Requirements ......................................... 9 
2. Costs and Funding ....................................................................................... 9 
III. Findings ............................................................................................................... 10 
A. Trespassing and Reclamations ...................................................................... 10 
1. Castle Hill Houses ...................................................................................... 12 
2. Mitchel Houses ............................................................................................ 12 
3. Surfside Gardens Houses .......................................................................... 13 
B. Areas for Improvement ............................................................................. 14 
1. Inspections ................................................................................................... 14 
2. Locks ............................................................................................................. 15 
3. Resident Involvement ................................................................................ 16 
IV. Recommendations ............................................................................................. 17 
V. Conclusion ........................................................................................................... 18 
 
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 1 
I. Executive Summary 
The number of vacant apartments in New York City Housing Authority 
(“NYCHA” or the “Authority”) properties has increased in recent years, from 
approximately 2,840 vacancies in January 2022 to approximately 6,740 vacancies as 
of May 2025.1 The current average duration of a vacancy is approximately one year.2,3 
This Report details the areas  in which NYCHA should  improve its current security 
measures for vacant units, as defined below; the joint efforts of the New York City 
Department of Investigation (“DOI”), the New York City Police Department 
(“NYPD”), and NYCHA to reclaim unlawfully occupied apartments; and the instances 
of trespassing and other criminal activity discovered in certain vacant units as a 
result of these joint efforts. This Report also makes five recommendations to NYCHA 
to enhance the security of its vacant apartments.  
A vacant apartment,
4 for purposes of this Report, is defined as an apartment 
that has been vacated by the tenant (s) of record and is not the subject of a legal 
dispute involving a claim to reside in the apartment (such as a licensee or successor 
claim). Vacant apartments can be refurbished by NYCHA and then provided to a new 
tenant. Apartments that are involved in legal disputes must first be officially vacated 
(i.e., no individual resides therein and any legal disputes have been resolved) before 
they are deemed vacant and within NYCHA’s control to freely change the locks, 
inspect, refurbish, and make available for a  new tenant. Because NYCHA’s control 
over such apartments is limited, this Report focuses on vacant apartments, as defined 
above.   
The number and duration of NYCHA vacancies are due to various factors. 
These factors include: (1) an increase in transfers of tenants from one NYCHA 
apartment to another;
5 (2) funding constraints that extend the time required to 
refurbish a vacant apartment; 6 and (3) an increase in the number of vacant 
 
1 N.Y.C. Housing Auth., NYCHA Metrics, Vacancies, 
https://eapps.nycha.info/NychaMetrics/Charts/PublicHousingChartsTabs/?section=public_housing&t
ab=tab_repairs (last visited Feb. 13, 2026). 
2 Id. 
3 In August 2024, the monthly average was 425 days, the highest in the period addressed in this 
Report. In May 2025, the monthly average was 376 days.  
4 NYCHA has three types of vacant apartment units: units undergoing refurbishment (also referred to 
as turnover units); units that are unavailable and off the rent roll, both permanently and temporarily; 
and matched units (units that have been refurbished and for which a new tenant has been identified). 
See infra note 16. 
5 Approximately 60% of NYCHA move-ins are resident transfers, meaning that 60% of move-ins create 
a new vacancy. NYCHA also maintains a number of vacant units available for tenants that the 
Authority must transfer/relocate due to comprehensive modernization projects. 
6 See infra II, C, 2.  
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 2 
apartments that require lead abatement, due to a local law change lowering the 
permissible level of lead in lead-based paint.7 These issues increase both the number 
of vacancies and the length of time an apartment remains vacant —further reducing 
the availability of the City’s limited stock of public housing,  for which there is a 
waitlist of approximately 165,000 applicants. 8 When apartments are vacant for 
lengthy periods of time without adequate security measures, they may pose a safety 
risk for NYCHA residents, staff, and vendors. Such apartments may become illegally 
occupied by unauthorized individuals and may be used as a base for illegal activities.  
NYCHA, DOI, and the NYPD have worked collaboratively to recover 
possession of vacant apartments from unauthorized occupants. From January 2022 
to May 2025, NYPD recovered possession of 548 NYCHA apartments from 
unauthorized occupants;
9 of these 548 reclamations, 60  were effectuated through 
joint efforts of DOI and NYPD. 10 The joint DOI and NYPD reclamation efforts 
resulted in the  arrests of 81 individuals engaged in criminal activity in, or with 
respect to, the apartments—arrests resulting in charges such as trespassing, criminal 
possession of a controlled substance, and criminal possession of a weapon.   
Factors contributing to the risks associated with vacant apartments include 
NYCHA’s lack of regular inspections and inadequate lock procedures for such 
apartments. Indeed, DOI found that NYCHA does not proactively inspect its vacant 
apartments that are awaiting refurbishment, or are being refurbished, but are not 
yet ready for rental .
11 Renovating an apartment can take up to one year, therefore 
many apartments are not subject for that entire period to inspections that could 
reveal trespassers or other illegal activity, though staff enter apartments to conduct 
work during that time. NYCHA’s procedure also does not require unique locks (or at 
 
7 See infra II, C, 1. 
8 N.Y.C. Housing Auth., NYCHA Metrics, Vacancies, 
https://eapps.nycha.info/NychaMetrics/Charts/PublicHousingChartsTabs/?section=public_housing&t
ab=tab_repairs (last visited Feb. 13, 2026). 
9 Examining the Cause of Vacancies in NYCHA Properties: Meeting of the Committee on Public 
Housing, (N.Y.C. Council 2025), 
https://legistar.council.nyc.gov/MeetingDetail.aspx?ID=1313799&GUID=6679618F-2971-48C8-B9FF-
A3CC69EC72F4&Options=info|&Search= (NYPD provided these numbers in their testimony to the 
N.Y.C. Council during this hearing. Based on the available information, DOI is unable to determine 
how many of these units were vacant, as defined in this Report.). 
10 In September 2024, NYCHA began to require centralized reporting and documentation of suspected 
trespassing in NYCHA apartments. Over the following year, from September 2024 to September 2025, 
NYCHA recorded 305 vacant apartments occupied by a suspected un authorized individual, 296 of 
which resulted in reclamation (included within the 548), and as of September 2025, 9 of which 
remained occupied by residents whose rights to reside in the unit were under review by NYCHA’s Law 
Department. 
11 See infra III, B, 1.  
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 3 
least a variety of locks) for vacant apartments, and instead requires the use of a single 
key (called a “move-out key”) for all vacant apartments at a development.12 While use 
of a single key for all apartments is most efficient for workers handling renovations 
of multiple apartments, it poses unacceptable safety risks, as access to this move-out 
key means access to—and the ability to improperly utilize — any vacant apartment in 
that development.  
Therefore, for vacant apartments, it is DOI’s recommendation that NYCHA 
implement regular inspections and use keys that restrict access to a smaller number 
of apartments. It is also DOI’s recommendation that NYCHA empower and educate 
Resident Watch volunte ers
13 so that they are aware and ready to report 
circumstances that may indicate that a vacant apartment has been taken over by 
unauthorized individuals.  DOI’s findings make clear that there are risks of 
trespassing and illegal occupancy in vacant units.  These risks would be mitigated if 
NYCHA implements DOI’s five recommendations, included below, to strengthen 
NYCHA’s oversight of its vacant apartments:  
1. The Authority should edit Standard Procedure, 040:22:2, Apartment Turnover, 
Monthly Building, and Other Maintenance Inspections, to require that 
Property Management conduct monthly inspections (e.g., check the windows 
and door locks, check for signs of unauthorized occupants [personal belongings, 
waste]) in vacant apartments that are not  ready for rental — i.e., unit s that 
have been vacated by the tenant(s) of record and are not the subject of a legal 
dispute, and thus can be inspected by NYCHA. During those inspections, 
Property Management should secure vacant apartments, ensuring operational 
window and door locks, to prevent trespassing.  If Property Management 
discovers that there is/are (an) unauthorized individual(s) during an 
inspection, the Property Management employee should immediately (no later 
than 72 hours after discovery) make a report to NYCHA’s Law Department. 
NYCHA accepts.  NYCHA, however, states that it will need 
approximately one year to implement this recommendation, as 
NYCHA I nformation Technology will need to create new auto -
generated work orders for these inspections.   
 
 
12 See infra III, B, 2.  
13 Resident Watch is a voluntary program, and developments and buildings opt in to the program. 
Resident Watch volunteers may not cover all floors or areas within each building. There is currently 
an active Resident Watch at over 100 NYCHA developments. 
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 4 
2. NYCHA should evaluate the feasibility of alternative locksets or security 
technologies, including electronic locks and keys. While studying these 
alternatives, NYCHA should edit Standard Procedure, 040:22:2, Apartment 
Turnover, Monthly Building, and Other Maintenance Inspections, to require 
that developments have multiple (a minimum of two or three, depending on 
the quantity of vacancies at a development) versions of move-out cylinders (and 
their related keys) to use on a rotating basis. This will reduce th e number of 
apartments within a development that can be accessed by a single key. No two 
developments should use the same versions of keys. If NYCHA determines that 
an alternative lockset is feasible, then NYCHA should update the 
aforementioned Standard Procedure accordingly. NYCHA accepts.   
 
3. The Authority should edit Standard Procedure, 001:17:1, Resident Watch 
Guidelines, to require that Resident Watch volunteers report to the Resident 
Watch Supervisor any suspected unauthorized inhabitants or illegal activity 
in a  vacant apartment. The Resident Watch Supervisor should (1) inform 
Property Management of any such discoveries by the end of their shift and (2) 
include any such reports on their Quality of Life f orm. The Resident Watch 
should not take any action regarding these individuals other tha n reporting 
such discoveries to Property Management. NYCHA should also train Resident 
Watch related to this requirement. NYCHA accepts . NYCHA, however, 
states that it will need approximately six months to a year to  
implement the portion of this recommendation pertaining to the 
Quality of Life form , as NYCHA I nformation Technology will need to 
make an enhancement to said form. 
 
4. Upon receipt of such a report from the Resident Watch Supervisor, as described 
in recommendation 3 above, Property Management should immediately seek 
to confirm the information and, if verified, immediately (no later than 72 hours 
after discovery) make a report to NYCHA’s Law Department. NYCHA 
accepts. 
 
5. If/when the Authority receives additional funding for refurbishment of vacant 
apartments, NYCHA should deploy that funding so as to reduce the period of 
time necessary to complete refurbishment.  NYCHA accepts, subject to 
funding. 
 
 
 
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 5 
II. Background 
The following is background information pertinent to DOI’s findings: the 
relevant NYCHA offices for reclamation and turnover; NYCHA’s apartment 
reclamation process, including NYCHA’s coordination with DOI and NYPD; and 
factors contributing to the increased quantity and duration of vacant apartments.      
 
A. NYCHA’s Organization and Turnover of Vacant Apartments 
NYCHA’s Law Department, Housing Litigation Division, which is overseen by 
the Vice President and Deputy General Counsel of Housing Litigation,  leads 
NYCHA’s investigation and litigation of apartment occupancy disputes and 
coordinates with NYPD and DOI on reclamation. The relevant NYPD office for those 
reclamations is the Housing Bureau Reclamation Unit (“HBRU”) —founded in 2023 
by NYPD’s Housing Bureau, with guidance from NYCHA’s Law Department —to 
centralize NYPD’s apartment reclamation operations and better coordinate with 
NYCHA.
14 
 
After an apartment has been vacated or reclaimed, and any occupancy disputes 
have been resolved, then NYCHA can begin apartment turnover—i.e., the process of 
making an apartment entirely ready for occupancy . Various NYCHA offices and 
employees are responsible for aspects of the apartment turnover process. Property 
management operations, and certain work related to apartment turnover (i.e., lead -
based paint and asbestos testing and abatement), is overseen by th e Executive Vice 
President for Property Management Operations (“EVP for PMO”), who reports to the 
Chief Operating Officer (“COO”).  The EVP for PMO oversees NYCHA’s Healthy 
Homes Unit, which is led by a Senior Vice President and responsible for lead -based 
paint and asbestos testing and abatement oversight. Lead and asbestos testing and 
abatement is complex work that is primarily done b y vendors and is overseen by 
NYCHA’s Healthy Homes Unit.  
 
Apartment turnover also requires skilled -trades work (e.g., painting, 
plastering, and tiling), the majority of which is handled by Property Management 
 
14 See N.Y.P.D., Bureaus, Housing (2025) https://www.nyc.gov/site/nypd/bureaus/transit -
housing/housing.page (last visited Feb. 13, 2026) (“The Housing Bureau is responsible for the safety 
of nearly a half-million residents, employees, and visitors in the city's housing developments. 
Working in close coordination and partnership with resident patrols, community groups, and 
development managers, members of the Housing Bureau are committed to effectively reducing crime 
and aggressively targeting violations and other conditions that detract from the quality of life for 
residents in and around New York City Housing Developments.”). 
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 6 
Operations, overseen by Vice Presidents (“VPs”) for Property Management, based in 
boroughs, who report to the EVP for PMO. In some cases, turnover is handled by 
vendors and/or NYCHA’s Technical Services Department.   
 
B. Apartment Reclamation  
Reclamation is the process of removing unauthorized occupants from a 
NYCHA apartment.  It generally involves three phases: a report of suspected 
unauthorized occupancy; an investigation of the legal rights of the occupant(s), and 
litigation, if necessary; and the reclamation operation. Apartments that are already 
designated as vacant (as def ined in this Report), and have been occupied by a 
trespasser (someone with no right to be in the apartment), may generally be 
immediately reclaimed by NYPD, after NYCHA i nvestigates and substantiates the 
report.
15 Cases of suspected unauthorized occupancy of apartments that are not 
technically vacant generally take much longer to resolve due to not only investigation, 
but also litigation in certain circumstances.  
 
In most cases, first, NYCHA staff, DOI, and/or NYPD inform (s) the Housing 
Litigation Division of NYCHA’s Law Department that there is a vacant apartment 
that appears to be occupied by a potentially unauthorized individual. Investigators 
from NYCHA’s Law Department then investigate and conduct outreach (with the 
tenant of record, next of kin, etc.) to determine whether the occupant has a legal right 
to remain in the apartment. This can take varying lengths of time due to a variety of 
factors, including the ease of communicating with and receiving documentation from 
individuals such as the current occupant(s), prior tenant(s) of record, and any other 
individual(s) relevant to the case. If the occupant is found to lack such legal rights, 
NYCHA’s Law Department authorizes NYPD and DOI (or NYPD solely when the 
reclamation is not a joint operation) to recover the vacant apartment. NYPD (HBRU), 
in coordination with DOI (when it’s a joint operation), may then enter the apartment, 
arrest the occupants, if appropriate,  and escort the occupant(s) out of the unit. 
Finally, NYCHA secures the apartment and can begin turnover. 
 
If any individual asserts an occupancy claim that NYCHA disputes, then the 
dispute must be litigated in an administrative hearing and/or New York City Housing 
Court. A full adjudication, including possible appeal, can take over 24 months. When 
these disputes are ongoing, NYCHA’s potential security measures are constrained, 
 
15 N.Y. Real Property Actions and Proceedings Law § 711 (In April 2024, New York State updated its 
landlord-tenant statute to specify that a “squatter” is not considered a tenant for purposes of the 
statute and associated tenancy protections). 
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 7 
as such occupants are generally permitted to reside in the unit (with the same rights 
to control the apartment that a legitimate tenant has ) until a judicial decision is 
reached. Thus, NYCHA cannot change the locks or conduct monthly security 
inspections of these units during this period because they are considered to be 
occupied. 
 
It is also worth noting that, prior to 2024, NYCHA did not have formalized 
procedures in place intended to address suspected trespassing in its vacant 
apartments, including with respect to reporting and documentation. Staff instead 
would generally call NYPD to report trespassing with varied results. However, in 
September 2024, NYCHA created a uniform procedure, and began requiring staff to 
call NYPD in response to trespassing only when there is a perceived imminent threat 
to public safety; NYCHA also began regularly recording information about suspected 
trespassing incidents and the apartments involved.  As a result, there is less data 
concerning suspected trespassing and reclamations for the period prior to September 
2024 than thereafter.   
 
C. Factors Contributing to the Increased Quantity and Duration of 
Vacancies 
As shown in the tables below, NYCHA vacancies
16 have increased from 
approximately 2,840 in January 2022 to approximately 6,740 as of May 2025, and the 
average vacancy duration is currently approximately one year.17,18   
 
 
16 NYCHA has three types of vacant units: (1) units undergoing turnover; (2) units that are unavailable 
and off the rent roll, including (a) permanently off rent -roll units, which (i) are being converted to 
Permanent Affordability Commitment Together (“PACT”) apartments, (ii) are uninhabitable and 
cannot be rehabilitated, or (iii) are being used for another purpose (e.g., as a NYCHA Property 
Management office, for a NYCHA Resident Association, or by NYPD as a room for law enforcement 
purposes); and (b) tempor ary off rent -roll units, which are designated for short -term relocations (i) 
resulting from fire/explosion/disaster, (ii) during modernization efforts (i.e., comprehensive 
modernization), and (iii) for disability/accessibility modification; and (3) matched  vacant units, which 
have been matched to prospective tenants.  The second category of vacant units —units that are 
unavailable and off the rent roll—is not included in this vacancy total.   
17 NYCHA provided these data sets to DOI on July 14, 2025. The charts do not include April 2021, 
when NYCHA had a system error that affected the Authority’s data accuracy. See also N.Y.C. 
Housing Auth., NYCHA Metrics, Vacancies, 
https://eapps.nycha.info/NychaMetrics/Charts/PublicHousingChartsTabs/?section=public_housing&t
ab=tab_repairs (last visited Feb. 13, 2026). 
18 In August 2024, the average vacancy duration was 425 days, the highest during the period addressed 
in this Report. In May 2025, the monthly average was 376 days. 
 
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 8 
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
Jan-19
Apr-19
Jul-19
Oct-19
Jan-20
Apr-20
Jul-20
Oct-20
Jan-21
Apr-21
Jul-21
Oct-21
Jan-22
Apr-22
Jul-22
Oct-22
Jan-23
Apr-23
Jul-23
Oct-23
Jan-24
Apr-24
Jul-24
Oct-24
Jan-25
Apr-25
Vacancy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Factors affecting NYCHA’s increased vacancy and turnover timeline include 
ensuring that the apartment complies with lead and asbestos abatement 
requirements, in addition to general renovation work; overall funding constraints; 
and, depending on the circumstances, tenant transfer and relocation.
19 The nature of 
these processes and costs are summarized below.     
 
19 As approximately 60% of NYCHA move -ins are resident transfers,  the elimination of one vacant 
apartment creates a new vacancy 60% of the time. NYCHA also must keep certain vacant units 
reserved for relocation of tenants due to comprehensive modernization projects.  
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Jan-2019
Apr-2019
Jul-2019
Oct-2019
Jan-2020
Apr-2020
Jul-2020
Oct-2020
Jan-2021
Apr-2021
Jul-2021
Oct-2021
Jan-2022
Apr-2022
Jul-2022
Oct-2022
Jan-2023
Apr-2023
Jul-2023
Oct-2023
Jan-2024
Apr-2024
Jul-2024
Oct-2024
Jan-2025
Apr-2025
Average Number of Days for Apartment Turnover
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 9 
1. Lead and Asbestos Abatement Requirements  
Once apartments have been vacated and are within NYCHA’s authority to 
refurbish, NYCHA must comply with a number of requirements —principally lead 
and asbestos testing and abatement —before undertaking the general construction 
work to refurbish and turnover the apartment.  
NYCHA’s lead testing and abatement obligations are governed by federal, 
state, and local laws and regulations. These include, on the City level, Local Law 66 
of 2019,20 which lowered the legal limit of lead in lead -based paint from 1.0 mg/cm 2 
to 0.5 mg/cm 2, effective December 1, 2021, and resulted in an approximately 20% 
increase in the percentage of NYCHA apartments testing positive for lead and  
therefore requiring abatement.21 NYCHA also has obligations related to lead visual 
inspections, testing, and abatement from its January 31, 2019, agreement with the 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, the U. S. Attorney’s Office for 
the Southern District of New York, and New York City (“Settlement Agreement”), 
which resolved a federal lawsuit against NYCHA alleging unlawful apartment 
conditions, including the failure to properly test for and abate lead-based paint. City 
law also governs NYCHA’s asbestos abatement responsibil ities, which affect the 
majority of the Authority’s apartments. NYCHA records indicate that approximately 
80% of the Authority’s vacant apartments contain asbestos -containing materials—
primarily vinyl asbestos floor tiles and asbestos -containing ceiling co atings—that 
may be affected during renovation and require abatement. 22 The prevalence of lead 
and asbestos in NYCHA apartments, and the testing and abatement work required, 
are significant drivers of the lengthy turnover process for NYCHA apartments. 
 
2. Costs and Funding 
The average cost to complete the turnover process is approximately $52,000 
($17,000 for lead abatement, $25,000 for asbestos abatement, and $10,000 for general 
 
20 See N.Y.C. Admin. Code § 27 -2056.2(7)(b) (codification of Local Law 66 of 2019’s 0. 5 mg/cm 2 
standard). 
21 Prior to December 1, 2021 (the effective date of Local Law 66 of 2019), the legal limit of lead in lead-
based paint was still 1.0 mg/cm 2. Under the 1.0 mg/cm 2 standard, approximately 25% of NYCHA’s 
apartments were testing positive for lead. Under the new 0.5 mg/cm2 standard, approximately 45% of 
NYCHA’s apartments are testing positive.  
22 Examining the Cause of Vacancies in NYCHA Properties: Meeting of the Committee on Public 
Housing, (N.Y.C. Council 2025), 
https://legistar.council.nyc.gov/MeetingDetail.aspx?ID=1313799&GUID=6679618F-2971-48C8-B9FF-
A3CC69EC72F4&Options=info|&Search=; see also N.Y.C. Housing Auth., 2025-2029 Capital Plan 
Narrative Final, https://www.nyc.gov/assets/nycha/downloads/pdf/2025-2029-Capital-Plan-Narrative-
Final.pdf (last visited Feb. 13, 2026). 
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 10 
renovations, though those costs vary widely). While NYCHA receives City funding to 
aid with apartment turnover, NYCHA faces general funding constraints, including 
those related to the required renovation work (both lead and asbestos abatement 
work and othe rwise), which can further delay completion of that work. First, once 
NYCHA has used the allotted funding for the particular year, monthly progress on 
renovation work inevitably declines until funding for the next year becomes available, 
and second the Authority prioritizes renovations of occupied apartments, rather than 
vacant units, and allocates funding accordingly.
23 Together, these funding issues 
make it difficult, if not impossible, for NYCHA to materially reduce the length of time 
necessary to ready an apartment for rental. For that reason, it is particularly 
important that NYCHA take steps to improve the security of its vacant apartments 
during the lengthy turnover process. 
III. Findings 
A. Trespassing and Reclamations 
The Authority maintains over 150,000 apartments in its conventional 24 
housing portfolio, and of those 150,000 apartments, approximately 140,000 were 
occupied as of May 2025, leaving approximately 6,700 units vacant (within the 
meaning described above).
25 NYPD’s HBRU, since its inception in 2023, has 
documented reclaiming over 548 NYCHA apartments, with assistance from NYCHA 
in the preceding investigations: 100 in 2023; 356 in 2024; and 92 in 2025 (as of June 
 
23 For vacant units, skilled -trades work is performed primarily during overtime assignments to 
preserve capacity for resident work orders in occupied units, and therefore requires funding that can 
be appropriated to overtime.  
24 Conventional housing refers to NYCHA’s apartments that receive funding through Section 9 of the 
United States Housing Act of 1937 and are managed by NYCHA Property Management. This Report 
does not address the 170,000 privately-owned Section 8 housing units for which NYCHA administers 
the housing voucher program, because those units are not managed by NYCHA Property Management.  
25 NYCHA has three types of vacant units: (1) units undergoing turnover; (2) units that are unavailable 
and off the rent roll, including (a) permanently off rent -roll units, which (i) are being converted to 
Permanent Affordability Commitment Together (“PACT”) apartments, (ii) are uninhabitable and 
cannot be rehabilitated, or (iii) are being used for another purpose (e.g., as a NYCHA Property 
Management office, for a NYCHA Resident Association, or by NYPD as a room for law enforcement 
purposes); and (b) tempor ary off rent -roll units, which are designated for short -term relocations (i) 
resulting from fire/explosion/disaster, (ii) during modernization efforts (i.e., comprehensive 
modernization, discussed below), and (iii) for disability/accessibility modification ; and (3) matched 
vacant units, which have been matched to prospective tenants. In total, NYCHA has approximately 
10,000 vacant units, a figure which includes all types of vacant units. The 6,700 figure excludes units 
that are unavailable and off the rent roll.   
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 11 
2025).26,27 Joint DOI and NYPD efforts reclaimed 60 of these 548 apartments and 
arrested 81 unauthorized occupants engaged in criminal activity in, or with respect 
to, the apartments. These charges include  trespassing (81), criminal possession of a 
controlled substance (17), and criminal possession of a weapon (3), amongst others.28 
From September 2024 through September 2025, the first year following 
NYCHA’s implementation of specified reporting procedures for suspected trespassing 
in its apartments (as discussed above), 29 NYCHA became aware of a total of 305 
apartments that were occupied by a suspected unauthorized individual. 296 of these 
apartments (included within the 548) have since been reclaimed and, as of September 
2025, 9 were occupied by residents whose right to r eside in the apartment remained 
under consideration by NYCHA’s Law Department.  
 
Below are examples of conditions discovered by NYPD , or NYPD and DOI 
jointly, during reclamation operations  in vacant NYCHA apartments . Because of 
NYCHA’s information-keeping practices prior to September 2024, the vacancy 
duration and other details about the particular apartments discussed in the examples 
are not available. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 Prior to NYPD’s formation of its HBRU, NYPD was permitted to reclaim an apartment without 
approval from NYCHA’s Law Department, while DOI was required to obtain approval before 
reclaiming an apartment. Both DOI and NYPD now obtain NYCHA Law Department approval prior 
to reclamation.   
27 Examining the Cause of Vacancies in NYCHA Properties: Meeting of the Committee on Public 
Housing, (N.Y.C. Council 2025), 
https://legistar.council.nyc.gov/MeetingDetail.aspx?ID=1313799&GUID=6679618F-2971-48C8-B9FF-
A3CC69EC72F4&Options=info|&Search= (NYPD provided these numbers in their testimony to the 
N.Y.C. Council during this hearing. Based on the available information, DOI is unable to determine 
how many of these units were vacant, as defined by this Report.). 
28 Criminal Possession of a Controlled Substance (N.Y. Penal Law  §§ 220.03 and 220.16); Criminally 
Using Drug Paraphernalia (§ 220.50); Criminal Possession of a Weapon (§§ 265.01, and 265.03); Grand 
Larceny (§  155.30); Forgery (§  170.15); Criminal Possession of a Forged Instrument (§  170.20); 
Criminal Possession of Stolen Property (§ 165.45).  
29 See supra II, B.  
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 12 
1. Castle Hill Houses 
In May 2023, NYPD officers responded to a 911 call and found a victim fatally 
shot in a vacant apartment in the Castle Hill Houses in the Bronx. NYPD reported 
that the victim allegedly was a member of the “Sex Money Murder” organization; had 
28 prior arrests, including for robberies, burglaries, and grand larcenies; and had a 
current I-Card
30 for robbery.   
 
 
Above is a photograph from a New York Daily News article showing the entrance to 
a vacant apartment in NYCHA’s Castle Hill Houses where NYPD officers found a 
deceased shooting victim.31 
 
2. Mitchel Houses 
After this Mitchel Houses unit was properly vacated on August 2, 2022, 
NYCHA suspected that unauthorized individuals had broken into the unit and were 
 
30 NYPD issues an “I-Card” (“Activate Investigation Card”) if there is probable cause to believe that 
an individual committed a felony.  
31 Andrew Califf et al., Aspiring young actor found slain in vacant Bronx NYCHA apartment, family 
shocked: ‘Had a whole future going for him’ (EXCLUSIVE), New York Daily News (May 21, 2023) 
https://www.nydailynews.com/2023/05/21/aspiring-young-actor-found-slain-in-vacant-bronx-nycha-
apartment-family-shocked-had-a-whole-future-going-for-him-exclusive/ (last visited Feb. 13, 2026). 

NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 13 
residing therein. NYCHA reported this information to DOI on March 28, 2023. After 
DOI completed its investigation, including database searches and interviews of 
NYCHA staff, in May 2023, DOI and NYPD arrested a woman residing in the 
apartment who was charged with child neglect.  
Pictured above are photographs of the conditions found in the vacant Mitchel 
Houses apartment.
32 
3. Surfside Gardens Houses 
On May 17, 2023, when Property Management for this development entered 
the apartment to complete turnover work, Property Management discovered two 
illegal occupants in the apartment and immediately notified NYPD of the situation.33 
That same day, NYPD responded; apprehended two individuals, both of whom were 
allegedly affiliated with the “Untouchable Gorilla Stone Nation” organization; and 
recovered one pistol and one loose 0.380 cartridge.  
 
 
 
 
 
32 Source: DOI.  
33 Prior to 2024, NYCHA did not have procedures in place intended to address suspected trespassing 
in its apartments, including with respect to reporting. Staff instead would generally call NYPD to 
report trespassing —instead of notifying NYCHA’s Law Departme nt (as is done now)—with varied 
results. Staff still call NYPD immediately if there is an imminent threat to public safety.  

NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 14 
B. Areas for Improvement  
1. Inspections 
NYCHA does not proactively inspect its vacant apartments to ensure that the 
unit is in fact vacant throughout the entirety of the apartment turnover cycle. 
NYCHA procedure currently requires that Property Management inspect for 
unauthorized occupants only in vacant apartments that are ready for rental, meaning 
that any necessary renovations have been completed. Because renovations generally 
take one year on average to complete, NYCHA’s vacant apartments are not inspected 
for unauthorized tenants or other signs of illegal activity for approximately one year, 
though staff enter the apartments to conduct work during that time. 
After an apartment becomes ready for rental, NYCHA recommends an 
inspection every 14  days and requires an inspection every 30 days.
34 NYCHA’s 
Property Management staff conduct monthly grounds inspections and could inspect 
vacant apartments in the course of those inspections. However, NYCHA has 
represented that Property Management staff are not required to do so because they 
are not sufficiently staffed to handle such inspections in addition to their existing 
responsibilities. NYCHA also takes the position that staff responsible for renovating 
the vacant apartment can report any signs of unauthorized occupancy or other illegal 
activity that they observe while c ompleting renovation-related tasks, obviating the 
need for additional inspections.
35  
Such reporting alone is not sufficient. First, renovation work generally does 
not start immediately after an apartment is vacated. Second, renovation work may 
occur intermittently during a year- long turnover process. Third, reporting in the 
course of the r enovation of an apartment may not significantly mitigate the risk of 
unauthorized occupancy, because Property Management employees are not explicitly 
required to make such reports in the course of their renovation work, although they 
often do so, and the locks currently used by NYCHA for vacant apartments increase 
 
34 N.Y.C. Housing Auth., NYCHA Standard Procedure, 040:22:2, Apartment Turnover, Monthly 
Building, and Other Maintenance Inspections (During these inspections in vacant apartments that 
are ready for rental, Property Management must “secure apartments includi ng windows to prevent 
squatters and unauthorized individuals from entering the apartment [emphasis added]; lights must be 
turned off; appliances must be turned off; plumbing fixture valves should be in the off position .”).  
35 NYCHA has agreed, at the request of the Office of the Inspector General for the United States 
Department of Housing and Urban Development, that the Authority include vacant apartments in 
their annual apartment inspections, which NYCHA had not previously done. But these annual 
inspections are intended only for the purpose of identifying certain habitability conditions (e.g., mold, 
leaks)—not to identify unauthorized occupants and secure the premises. F urthermore, annual 
inspections are insufficient to identify and prevent unauthorized occupants.  
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 15 
the risk of unauthorized use or residency, even while an apartment is undergoing 
turnover-related renovations.36 Therefore, relying on renovation staff reporting alone 
is not a meaningful solution to the potential public safety risk posed by unauthorized 
occupants. The absence of regular inspections increases the risk that trespassing and 
other illegal criminal activity can occur undetected in the vacant apartment and 
heightens security risks to the NYCHA community at large. It also delays the 
discovery of unauthorized occupants and the initiation of the recovery process.  
2.  Locks 
Ensuring that a vacant apartment is properly secured is a critical measure to 
reduce the risk of unauthorized occupants, and potentially, related illegal activity.   
NYCHA’s vacant units are especially vulnerable to trespassing because the Authority 
uses generic locksets to secure vacant apartments throughout NYCHA developments.  
A generic lockset is a mass- produced lockset comprised of an identical lock and key 
that is used for multiple units and/or other rooms across NYCHA buildings , 
depending on the type of generic key.  
NYCHA procedure currently requires that Property Management replace the 
unique tenant cylinder (and its related key) with a  move-out cylinder: a generic, 
development-wide lockset for vacant units.
37  This means that NYCHA developments 
are required to use the same lockset —and, thereby, the same key —for all vacant 
apartments within that particular NYCHA development , presenting the risk that 
individuals could, upon acquiring a key, access any vacant unit in the development . 
In some instances, Property Management staff deviate from the required practice and 
fit vacant unit s with a “65 key” —a generic lockset used not only for vacant 
apartments in this  instance, but also Authority-wide for certain rooms within 
NYCHA buildings, including some utility spaces and management offices. That is, 
Property Management’s occasional and unauthorized practice creates additional risk 
by using a generic lockset for vacant apartments that is also used for other spaces 
within NYCHA. 
This risk is not merely theoretical. In one apartment reclamation operation, 
DOI and NYPD found a 65 key left inside a vacant apartment. While this does not 
necessarily prove that the unauthorized occupant(s) used this key to access the 
 
36 N.Y.C. Housing Auth., Standard Procedure, 040:22:2, Apartment Turnover, Monthly Building, and 
Other Maintenance Inspections  (In vacant apartments that are ready for rental, Property 
Management must “secure apartments including windows to prevent squatters and unauthorized 
individuals from entering the apartment (emphasis added); lights must be turned off; appliances must 
be turned off; plumbing fixture valves should be in the off position.”). 
37 Id.   
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 16 
vacant apartment, it does indicate that the unauthorized occupant(s) of that 
particular apartment likely had access to that key left inside the unit, and thus had 
access to numerous other apartments and spaces within NYCHA.  
 
It is NYCHA’s position that using unique keys for each vacant unit poses 
significant operational challenges, because many different employees and contractors 
must access a vacant apartment during the renovation process; a generic key is more 
efficient for those purposes and costs less, as it does not require the purchase of 
unique locksets for each vacant unit. Nonetheless, the current practice poses an 
unacceptable risk of facilitating unauthorized occupancy and even crim inal conduct 
in vacant units, particularly in light of the absence of regular apartment inspections.   
 
3. Resident Involvement  
While NYCHA also has a Resident Watch program that is empowered to patrol 
and report suspected unlawful activity, NYCHA should more actively and effectively 
engage this program to encourage the reporting of suspected trespassing  in vacant 
units.  
In accordance with NYCHA’s Standard Procedure,
38 NYCHA’s Resident Watch 
program permits residents to opt in and create their own Resident Watch group at 
their development, which is  led by a Resident Watch Supervisor ( a paid role for a 
NYCHA resident). Currently, there is an active Resident Watch at over 100 NYCHA 
developments. The Resident Watch Unit of NYCHA ’s Office of Safety and Security  
oversees the Resident Watch program.  The Resident Watch’s duties  include 
conducting patrols — which are not 24/7 and do not always cover an entire 
development—and reporting suspected unlawful activity  on the Resident Watch’s 
Quality of Life (“QOL”) form, which it submits weekly to the Resident Watch Unit . 
The Resident Watch Unit  responds to said reports and coordinates with other 
NYCHA departments, as necessary.  
Notwithstanding these existing responsibilities, NYCHA’s Standard Procedure 
does not explicitly state (1) that  the Resident Watch Supervisor should report 
suspected trespassing in vacant units to Property Management immediately or (2) 
that Property Management should respond to such reports by the Resident Watch 
Supervisor by submitting the requisite forms to begin the reclamation investigation 
process within a reasonable time. NYCHA records  further indicate that current 
Resident Watch participants are not reporting unauthorized occupancy in their 
 
38 N.Y.C. Housing Auth., Standard Procedure, 001:17:1, Resident Watch Guidelines.  
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 17 
developments at the same rate that such unauthorized occupancy occurs, as only 28 
instances have been reported by Resident Watch from 2022 to 2025, despite over 500 
apartment reclamations occurring during this same period.  While the Resident 
Watch program could never entirely supplant inspections by NYCHA staff, nor does 
DOI expect it to considering the limited nature of the program (as explained above), 
NYCHA should revise its Standard Procedure and Q OL form to more explicitly and 
effectively engage Resident Watch and Property Management in the process of 
identifying and reporting unauthorized occupancy in the areas they patrol. Resident 
Watch has an intimate knowledge of, interest in, and—with better guid ance—ability 
to identify and report such issues in their developments. 
IV. Recommendations 
1. The Authority should edit Standard Procedure, 040:22:2, Apartment Turnover, 
Monthly Building, and Other Maintenance Inspections, to require that 
Property Management conduct monthly inspections (e.g., check the windows 
and door locks, check for signs of unauthorized occupants [personal belongings, 
waste]) in vacant apartments that are not  ready for rental — i.e., unit s that 
have been vacated by the tenant of record and are  not the subject of a legal 
dispute, and thus can be inspected by NYCHA. During those ins pections, 
Property Management should secure vacant apartments, ensuring operational 
window and door locks, to prevent trespassing. If Property Management 
discovers that there is/are (an) unauthorized individual(s) during an 
inspection, the Property Management employee should immediately (no later 
than 72 hours after discovery) make a report to NYCHA’s Law Department. 
NYCHA accepts.  NYCHA, however, states that it will need 
approximately one year to implement this recommendation, as 
NYCHA I nformation Technology will need to create new auto -
generated work orders for these inspections.   
 
2. NYCHA should evaluate the feasibility of alternative locksets or security 
technologies, including electronic locks and keys. While studying these 
alternatives, NYCHA should edit Standard Procedure, 040:22:2, Apartment 
Turnover, Monthly Building, and Other Maintenance Inspections, to require 
that developments have multiple (a minimum of two or three, depending on 
the quantity of vacancies at a development) versions of move-out cylinders (and 
their related keys) to use on a rotating basis. This will reduce th e number of 
apartments within a development that can be accessed by a single key. No two 
developments should use the same versions of keys. If NYCHA determines that 
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 18 
an alternative lockset is feasible, then NYCHA should update the 
aforementioned Standard Procedure accordingly. NYCHA accepts.   
 
3. The Authority should edit Standard Procedure, 001:17:1, Resident Watch 
Guidelines, to require that Resident Watch volunteers report to the Resident 
Watch Supervisor any suspected unauthorized inhabitants or illegal activity 
in a vacant apartment.  The Resident Watch Supervisor should (1) inform 
Property Management of any such discoveries by the end of their shift and (2) 
include any such reports on their Quality of Life f orm. The Resident Watch 
should not take any action regarding these individuals other than reporting 
such discoveries to Property Management. NYCHA should also train Resident 
Watch related to this requirement. NYCHA accepts . NYCHA, however, 
states that it will need approximately six months to a year to 
implement the portion of this recommendation pertaining to the 
Quality of Life form , as NYCHA I nformation Technology will need to 
make an enhancement to said form. 
 
4. Upon receipt of such a report from the Resident Watch Supervisor, as described 
in recommendation 3 above, Property Management should immediately seek 
to confirm the information and, if verified, immediately (no later than 72 hours 
after discovery) make a report to NYCHA’s Law Department. NYCHA 
accepts. 
 
5. If/when the Authority receives additional funding for refurbishment of vacant 
apartments, NYCHA should deploy that funding so as to reduce the period of 
time necessary to complete refurbishment.  NYCHA accepts, subject to 
funding. 
 
 
V. Conclusion 
NYCHA’s vacant units have increased in recent years —from approximately 
2,840 vacancies in January 2022 to approximately 6,740 vacancies as of May 2025—
and the average duration is now approximately one year. While the quantity and 
length of these vacancies are influenced by a variety of factors, many of which are 
difficult to control for both time and cost reasons beyond NYCHA’s control, NYCHA’s 
policies related to true vacancies —particularly the Aut hority’s inspection and lock 
policies—need improvement.  
 
NYCHA Vacant Apartment Reclamation March 2026  
Department of Investigation | 19 
While NYCHA has made some improvements, including with respect to its 
centralized reporting and reclamation practices and apartment turnover timeline, 
NYCHA’s current security procedures  (i.e., inspections and locks)  for vacant 
apartments must be revised to better protect the NYCHA community from the risk 
of trespassing. Therefore, it is imperative that NYCHA implement further changes, 
including DOI’s recommendations, to ensure that vacant apartments are free of 
trespassing and inaccessible to unauthorized occupants and that these units are 
prepared for rental as soon as possible.  
 
 