 
BOARD OF CORRECTION 
CITY OF NEW YORK 
 
 
 
 
 
Third Report and Recommendations on 2025 Deaths in New 
York City Department of Correction Custody1 
 
 
Date: May 1, 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Authored by Director of Special Investigations Rahzeem Gray. 

2 
 
Table of Contents 
Introduction...................................................................... 3 
Deaths in Custody ............................................................. 5 
1. Edwin Ramos .............................................................. 5 
2. Aramis Furse .............................................................. 9 
3. Kyron Randall ........................................................... 13 
Key Findings .................................................................... 18 
Recommendations .......................................................... 20 
 
 
 

3 
 
Introduction 
The New York City Board of Correction (“Board” or “BOC”) investigates the 
circumstances of deaths in custody pursuant to New York City Charter § 626(i)(2)2 
and § 3-10(c)(2) of Title 40 of the Rules of the City of New York.3 These 
investigations do not focus on ﬁnding criminality or individual shortcomings, but on 
identifying systemic ﬂaws and policy failures, and making recommendations to the 
New York City Department of Correction (“DOC” or “Department”) and NYC Health 
+ Hospitals/Correctional Health Services (“CHS”). CHS’s response to these 
recommendations is appended to this report. 
DOC operates eight housing facilities on Rikers Island and provides security at 
hospital prison wards in Manhattan and Queens. Additionally, DOC operates court 
pens in each of the ﬁve boroughs. In 2025, 15 individuals died while in custody or 
shortly after the court issued an order releasing them on their own recognizance. 
In a previous report titled “First Report and Recommendations on 2025 Deaths in 
New York City Department of Correction Custody,” the Board detailed ﬁndings and 
recommendations concerning ﬁve deaths that occurred between February and 
March 2025. In its “Second Report and Recommendations on 2025 Deaths in New 
York City Department of Correction Custody,” the Board covered seven deaths that 
occurred between June and September 2025. This report details the circumstances 
and recommendations related to the deaths of Edwin Ramos, Aramis Furse, and 
Kyron Randall, who died in November and December 2025.  
 
2 Except where the commissioner of investigation, the attorney general, or the district attorney 
for the county in which a death of an incarcerated individual held or conﬁned under the 
jurisdiction of the department occurred investigates such death or prosecutes any alleged 
criminal oﬀense related to such death and requests or directs the board not to investigate such 
death, the board shall investigate such death and prepare a report about such investigation. Such 
report shall include any recommendations about measures the department or correctional health 
services may implement to prevent the circumstances that contributed to the individual’s death. 
Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to limit the board’s discretion to investigate a death 
of an incarcerated individual held or conﬁned under the jurisdiction of the department, including 
any death the board attributes to a person’s time in the custody of the department.  
3 The Board of Correction shall conduct an investigation of inmate deaths including the review of 
all medical records of the deceased. 

4 
 
Board staﬀ responded to the respective facilities where each person died within 24 
hours of receiving notiﬁcation from DOC. BOC’s investigations consist of collecting 
and reviewing all relevant DOC, CHS, New York City Office of the Chief Medical 
Examiner (“OCME”), Emergency Medical Services (“EMS”), and hospital records. In 
addition, staff reviewed relevant fixed surveillance videos and footage from body-
worn cameras. Lastly, staff interviewed both uniformed and non-uniformed staff 
as well as individuals in custody. 
Some matters of concern staﬀ discovered during these investigations include: 
• The “B” post oﬃcers assigned to Mr. Furse’s and Mr. Randall’s housing areas 
abandoned their assigned posts multiple times during their tours. 
• The “B” post oﬃcer left Mr. Randall in his cell, unsupervised and unsecured, 
for 24 minutes during his medical emergency. 
• Logbook entries recorded by the oﬃcer in Mr. Randall’s housing area 
reﬂecting consistent 30-minute tours are inaccurate, as video footage shows 
the oﬃcer did not tour according to policy. 
• The “B” post oﬃcer in Mr. Randall’s housing area did not conduct tours in 
accordance with DOC Directive #4514R-C, which requires oﬃcers assigned to 
cell areas to conduct visual observations at 30-minute intervals, observing 
signs of life in each person in custody. 
• Multiple cell windows in Mr. Furse’s housing area were partially or 
completely covered, obstructing correction oﬃcers’ views into the cells. 
• Individuals in Mr. Ramos’ housing area appeared to possess drug 
paraphernalia.  
• Individuals in custody in Mr. Furse’s housing area accessed unauthorized cells 
during lockout periods, congregating in single cells designated for one 
person. 
• Housing area staﬀ allowed individuals in Mr. Furse’s housing area to remain 
locked out after 9:00 pm lock-in. After the 9:00 pm mandatory lock-in period, 
individuals were out of their cells and covered stationary cameras with 
tissues. 
 

5 
 
Deaths in Custody 
1. Edwin Ramos 
Mr. Ramos entered DOC custody as a new 
admission on August 15, 2025. Intake 
staﬀ at the Eric M. Taylor Center (“EMTC”) 
secured him in a new admission holding 
pen and began the screening process. 
After completing the DOC portion of the 
screening, CHS staﬀ examined Mr. Ramos.  
During the exam, CHS staﬀ identiﬁed two 
health conditions. The clinician noted Mr. 
Ramos was obese and had elevated blood 
pressure. For the next three days, Mr. Ramos was escorted to the clinic to check his 
blood pressure. 
During the medical screening, Mr. Ramos told CHS staﬀ that he used fentanyl and 
cocaine in the community. Urinalysis test results were negative for drugs. He 
requested to be enrolled in the Key Extended Entry Program (“KEEP”), a program 
for medication management of moderate to severe opioid use disorder. Records 
show Mr. Ramos did not meet the criteria outlined in the DSM-54 for moderate to 
severe opioid use disorder in keeping with federal Opioid Treatment Program 
(“OTP”) guidelines and, therefore, did not qualify for enrollment in the KEEP 
 
4 According to the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (“CDC”), the DSM-5 
(Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition) defines Opioid Use Disorder 
(“OUD”) as a problematic pattern of opioid use leading to clinically significant impairment or 
distress. OUD is demonstrated by two of 11 criteria occurring within a year, including taking 
opioids in larger amounts or over a longer period of time than intended, a persistent desire or 
unsuccessful attempts to reduce or control opioid use, continued opioid use causing inability to 
fulfill work, home, or school responsibilities, exhibiting withdrawal symptoms, among others. 
 
Age 
38 
Date of death 
November 21, 
2025 
Admission date August 15, 2025 
Cause of death 
Pending 
Facility at time 
of death 
Otis Bantum 
Correctional 
Center (“OBCC”) 
Bail amount 
$20,000 

6 
 
program. CHS determined that general population housing was clinically 
appropriate for Mr. Ramos.5 
On August 18, 2025, DOC assigned Mr. Ramos to a new admission dormitory area 
in EMTC. Two days later, he was transferred to a dormitory area at the Rose M. 
Singer Center Enhanced Supervision Housing (“RESH”) Annex.6 While in the RESH 
Annex, he received an infraction for his role in an assault on staﬀ. The hearing 
captain found him guilty on all charges at the hearing.  
On October 29, 2025, two months after entering DOC custody, CHS received Mr. 
Ramos’ medical record from the New York State Oﬃce of Mental Health. Unlike 
what Mr. Ramos stated at intake, records showed a history of behavioral health 
diagnoses, such as psychoactive substance-related disorders, alcohol-related 
disorders, cocaine use disorder, tobacco-related disorders, major depressive 
disorder, unspeciﬁed psychotic disorders, and unspeciﬁed anxiety disorders. In 
addition, the records also mention Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.  
Later in the month, at 1:00 pm on October 30, 2025, correctional staﬀ in Mr. Ramos’ 
housing area activated a medical emergency after learning he was experiencing 
pain in his right shoulder and chest for two consecutive days. CHS staﬀ arrived at 
1:06 pm. Medical responders assisted him onto a gurney and departed the area for 
the clinic. Once in the clinic, CHS staﬀ checked his blood pressure. It was elevated, 
at 199/118. The on-site doctor ordered a stat dosage of clonidine to bring down his 
blood pressure. Repeat blood pressure was 195/110. CHS staﬀ called EMS to 
request a hospital transport. Following treatments and EMS arrival, Mr. Ramos’ 
blood pressure was 134/88; 20 minutes later it was 134/91. EMS departed the clinic 
with Mr. Ramos for Elmhurst Hospital. Elmhurst staﬀ examined Mr. Ramos and did 
not ﬁnd any abnormalities, which prompted them to process him for discharge back 
to Rikers Island. 
On October 31, 2025, Elmhurst staﬀ discharged Mr. Ramos from the hospital. 
Correctional staﬀ transferred him to a general population housing area in the 
 
5 General population housing is designed by custody level for individuals who do not require 
special housing. 
6 General population dormitory at RMSC that exclusively houses men. 

7 
 
George R. Vierno Center (“GRVC”). Upon his return that day, CHS staﬀ prescribed 
him a 10-day supply of amlodipine and lisinopril, commonly known to treat high 
blood pressure. 
On November 6, 2025, correctional staﬀ transferred Mr. Ramos to a general 
population dormitory in OBCC. He remained in this unit incident-free until 
November 20, 2025. 
On November 20, Mr. Ramos’ housing area had a “B” post oﬃcer assigned to the 
unit.7 Despite having a “B” post oﬃcer, video surveillance captured several 
individuals in possession of or smoking unknown paraphernalia during the “B” 
oﬃcer’s shift.  At 6:14 pm, while the oﬃcer sat at the “B” post desk by the housing 
area entrance, one individual sat on Mr. Ramos’ bed and appeared to a roll slim, 
white paraphernalia resembling a cigarette. Individuals appeared to smoke the 
paraphernalia at 6:18 pm but quickly extinguished it before the “B” oﬃcer reached 
their area during their tour. Mr. Ramos was not one of the individuals smoking the 
paraphernalia. 
At 7:15 pm, the individuals lit new paraphernalia that resembled a cigarette while 
the oﬃcer conducted another tour. At 10:44 pm, six individuals gathered between 
two beds and appeared to share the contraband resembling a cigarette while the 
“B” oﬃcer was seated at the “B” post. During this time, video showed the oﬃcer 
exiting the unit twice from 6:50 pm through 6:54 pm and 9:54 pm through 10:05 
pm.  
At 11:24 pm, video surveillance captured Mr. Ramos removing an unknown item 
from a folder next to his bed and placing the contents in his mouth. At 11:56 pm, 
shortly after ingesting the item, he entered the bathroom holding a roll of toilet 
paper. He appeared lethargic as he suddenly leaned over the bathroom partition. 
He exited the bathroom for a moment then reentered at 12:00 am. At 12:05 am, 
appearing to be done using the bathroom, he stood up and suddenly fell forward, 
face down. An individual in the unit entered the bathroom moments after Mr. 
 
7 DOC uses the term “B” post when referring to a correction oﬃcer assigned to a housing area 
ﬂoor post. “B” post oﬃcers interact with and directly supervise people in custody inside the living 
area. 

8 
 
Ramos fell to the ﬂoor. The individual appeared to alert the “B” post oﬃcer, which 
prompted them to enter the bathroom. Once inside, the “B” oﬃcer observed Mr. 
Ramos on the ﬂoor with a white sheet over his body. Subsequently, the “B” oﬃcer 
appeared to call out for the “A” post oﬃcer and advise them to activate a medical 
emergency.8 Body-worn video captured the oﬃcer state that Mr. Ramos was 
appearing to have a seizure. Video footage also captured the oﬃcer removing the 
sheet and pulling up Mr. Ramos’ pants. The oﬃcer then turned Mr. Ramos onto his 
side, at which time he could be heard snoring and slightly moving his right hand. 
The “B” oﬃcer started rubbing Mr. Ramos’ arm and checked his pulse. The oﬃcer 
then instructed an individual in the bathroom to go to the “A” station window to 
retrieve Narcan9 from the “A” post oﬃcer. At 12:10 am, ﬁve minutes after observing 
Mr. Ramos in distress, the “B” post oﬃcer administered Narcan. At 12:11 am, the 
oﬃcer administered a second dose of Narcan and began chest compressions.   
At 12:15 am, CHS staﬀ arrived with portable emergency response equipment, 
including a ﬂat board, a CPR disposable mask, and a medical supply bag. According 
to CHS records, Mr. Ramos was on the ﬂoor in a supine position, and his skin 
appeared to be discolored. Body-worn camera footage shows a nurse instructing 
that EMS be immediately notiﬁed at 12:17 am, and a DOC captain relaying the 
message to Central Control. The DOC captain began administering chest 
compressions while the nurse placed automated external deﬁbrillator (“AED”) pads 
on Mr. Ramos. At 12:20 am, CHS staﬀ noted that the reading on the AED device was 
“not ﬂat” and that Mr. Ramos had a pulse. Staﬀ administered a third dose of Narcan 
before placing Mr. Ramos on a ﬂat board and carrying him to the clinic at 12:21 am, 
arriving at 12:25 am. EMS arrived at the clinic at 12:37 am and immediately 
provided ﬂuids intravenously, administered ﬁve doses of epinephrine, and 
completed intubation. The Urgicare physician administered an additional dose of 
 
8 “A” post oﬃcers remain inside the “A” station, colloquially known as the “bubble.” The “A” 
station is the housing area’s secured control room and cannot be accessed by people in custody. 
9 Per DOC Directive #2/22, eﬀective June 30, 2022, Naloxone (Narcan) is a life-saving medication 
in the form of a nasal spray that can reverse the eﬀects of an opioids overdose. Trained staﬀ 
members and incarcerated individuals can administer Narcan if an individual displays 
unresponsiveness, slow or no breathing, blue or grey lips and/or ﬁngernails, or snoring or gurgling 
sounds. 

9 
 
epinephrine and administered sodium bicarbonate. EMS administered one round 
of calcium before departing the facility with Mr. Ramos. EMS transported Mr. 
Ramos to Mount Sinai Queens, where he was pronounced deceased at 1:25 am. 
Immediately after CHS departed the housing area with Mr. Ramos, the “B” post 
oﬃcer exited the bathroom and conducted a tour of the area. The oﬃcer observed 
an individual sleeping on a bed holding what appeared to be lit contraband. The 
contraband resembled a cigarette as it was slim and white. The oﬃcer removed the 
contraband without waking the individual and continued the tour. In addition to 
conﬁscating contraband following the incident, all individuals in custody housed in 
Mr. Ramos’ unit were drug tested. Some individuals refused to cooperate. Most 
tested negative. However, test results for four individuals were presumed positive. 
Reports do not indicate the substance for which the individuals tested positive. 
DOC dispatched a Special Search Team to Mr. Ramos’ housing area. The team 
searched all individuals in custody in the unit, their beds, property, and community 
areas. Staﬀ did not recover drug-related contraband. 
DOC’s Special Investigations Unit assigned staﬀ to investigate this incident. Their 
investigation is ongoing; however, preliminary ﬁndings do not identify wrongdoing 
or staﬀ misconduct. 
OCME has yet to provide the Board with records on Mr. Ramos’ cause of death. 
2. Aramis Furse 
Aramis Furse arrived at EMTC as a new 
admission on May 3, 2025. During the 
new admission assessment, intake staﬀ 
noted Mr. Furse had a history of using 
cocaine and consuming alcohol.  
CHS staﬀ examined Mr. Furse after he 
completed DOC’s screening. He informed 
staﬀ that he had a history of asthma and reported sustaining a head injury that 
caused him to lose consciousness one year earlier. In addition, he expressed feeling 
Age 
32 
Date of death 
December 7, 2025 
Admission date May 3, 2025 
Cause of death 
Pending 
Facility at time 
of death 
OBCC 
Bail amount 
$45,002 

10 
 
depressed. The clinician made a stat referral for a mental health evaluation. 
Urinalysis testing returned positive for cocaine and marijuana.  
A mental health clinician evaluated Mr. Furse shortly after he completed the 
medical screening. Mr. Furse denied feeling suicidal, hopeless or worthless, or 
having current mental health or emotional problems. He did state that he was 
depressed due to being on Rikers Island for the second time. The clinician diagnosed 
him with adjustment disorder with depressed mood. CHS determined he was 
clinically appropriate for general population housing with mental health follow-up. 
On May 5, 2025, almost 48 hours after entering custody.10 Mr. Furse was assigned 
to a new admission general population dormitory in EMTC.  
On May 14, 2025, Mr. Furse called CHS’s Health Triage Line11 to report that he was 
feeling depressed and that he felt like hurting others, but not himself. Later that 
same day, a clinician met with Mr. Furse and diagnosed him with other speciﬁed 
depressive disorder, as well as cocaine use disorder. The clinician referred him to 
the KEEP program. CHS reviewed his records and determined that he did not meet 
the federal OTP criteria for enrollment in KEEP. Although CHS did not enroll him in 
KEEP, the team scheduled supportive counseling and a mental health follow-up. 
On May 22, 2025, one week after Mr. Furse met with mental health to discuss 
feelings of depression, he had a follow-up visit. He reported increased depression 
symptoms since the last meeting and other concerns, such as feeling sad, sleep 
deprived and frustrated to the point where he displays anger by punching a wall. 
The examiner prescribed melatonin on May 23 and sertraline on May 26. 
From May through November 2025, Mr. Furse received three infractions for 
ﬁghting, assaulting staﬀ, and refusing to follow facility rules. 
 
10 According to Operations Order #22/07, eﬀective December 14, 2007, newly processed 
individuals must be provided with appropriate housing within 24 hours of their arrival into the 
custody of the Department. 
11 CHS’s Health Triage Line is a channel of communication for patients to contact CHS directly 
about their non-emergency health concerns. 

11 
 
On December 6, 2025, surveillance video showed all individuals locked in their cells 
while the unit was on lockdown. Despite the lockdown at 7:50 pm, individuals 
began to exit their cells. They appeared to pass a white rolled cigarette and access 
unassigned cells. DOC policy prohibits multiple individuals from occupying a single 
cell and from being inside a cell that is not their own. During this time, the “B” 
oﬃcer was on the unit and observed individuals out of their cells. 
At 8:03 pm, the oﬃcer conducted a tour while individuals accessed unauthorized 
cells. During the tour, the oﬃcer did not stop at Mr. Furse’s cell. At the time, another 
individual was inside Mr. Furse’s cell with him and remained there for the next 30 
minutes. During the subsequent tour, at 8:36 pm, the oﬃcer observed the other 
person in custody inside Mr. Furse’s cell, prompting them to utilize the DOC radio 
to ask the “A” post oﬃcer to open the cell. Once open, the “B” oﬃcer directed the 
individual to step out. They complied, exiting the cell without further interaction. 
Mr. Furse’s cell was then closed. The oﬃcer returned to the “B” desk. 
A short time later, at 9:12 pm, the oﬃcer walked the unit, communicating with 
individuals who were outside of their cells. From 9:12 pm through 9:18 pm, video 
footage showed the “B” oﬃcer conducting the institutional lock-in. The area captain 
entered the housing and conducted a tour after the individuals were locked in. After 
the captain completed their tour and exited the unit, individuals began to exit their 
cells and resume rolling and passing contraband resembling a white rolled cigarette. 
The oﬃcer did not appear to instruct the individuals to return to their cells. 
Throughout this, Mr. Furse remained in his cell. 
At 9:55 pm, the “B” post oﬃcer exited the unit and entered the “A” station. While 
the “B” oﬃcer was oﬀ post, individuals gathered in two cells, appearing to roll 
paraphernalia that resembled a white cigarette. They used tissues to cover two 
stationary ﬁxed cameras in the area directly above the cells. 
At 10:13 pm, 18 minutes later, the “B” oﬃcer reentered the unit and returned to 
their post. One individual was on their knees, crawling to their cell as the “B” oﬃcer 
entered the unit. The “B” oﬃcer did not appear to oﬀer aid or inquire why the 
individual was crawling on the ﬂoor.  

12 
 
The “B” oﬃcer conducted a tour at 10:20 pm. During the tour, the oﬃcer brieﬂy 
stopped and ﬂicked the lights inside Mr. Furse’s cell, then continued touring. 
Logbook entries around this time reﬂect routine entries stating, “nothing to report.” 
Shortly after completing the tour, the “B” oﬃcer exited the unit at 10:59 pm.  
At 11:03 pm, while the “B” oﬃcer was oﬀ post, an individual appeared to slide 
something resembling a cigarette under Mr. Furse’s door. One minute later, a group 
of individuals stopped at Mr. Furse’s cell to check on him. They ﬂicked the lights 
multiple times and appeared to have a four-minute exchange with him before 
walking away. At 11:14 pm, 15 minutes after departing the area, the “B” oﬃcer 
reentered the unit. 
In the early hours of December 7, individuals checked on Mr. Furse multiple times 
after passing suspected contraband under his door. At 12:43 am, multiple 
individuals entered Mr. Furse’s cell. The “B” oﬃcer then approached the cell. The 
individuals exited, closing the cell door behind them.  
From 1:12 am through 2:00 am, individuals stopped by Mr. Furse’s cell numerous 
times to check on him through his cell window. According to people in custody, they 
alerted the “B” oﬃcer of Mr. Furse's condition after hearing him make “weird 
noises” at 2:00 am. The oﬃcer responded and observed him unresponsive, which 
prompted them to utilize the DOC radio to advise the “A” post oﬃcer to activate a 
medical emergency. The “B” oﬃcer administered one application of Narcan while 
awaiting medical staﬀ. 
CHS staﬀ entered the unit at 2:10 am. According to CHS reports, responders found 
Mr. Furse in bed, water and vomit on the bed, the ﬂoor, and his mouth. He showed 
no signs of breathing, had no pulse, his pupils were ﬁxed and dilated, and he was 
not responding to any stimuli. The team moved him from the bed to the ﬂoor and 
began chest compressions. In addition, they connected him to a LifePak to monitor 
his vital signs, administered two doses of Narcan and Glucagon, and connected him 
to a Lund University Cardiopulmonary Assist System (“LUCAS”) device. EMS and 
Urgicare arrived at 2:30 am and continued aid. At 2:47 am, EMS departed the area 
with Mr. Furse for transport to Mount Sinai Queens Hospital. 

13 
 
At 3:14 am, Mount Sinai staﬀ called DOC to inform them Mr. Furse passed away. 
After being notiﬁed of Mr. Furse’s death, DOC dispatched a Special Search Team and 
K-9 unit to report to Mr. Furse’s housing area. The search team found 66 pills inside 
of a cup located on the desk in the cell, two burnt rolled up papers on the sink, and 
a burnt piece of paper on the ﬂoor in the doorway of the cell. In addition, the search 
team found a three-inch piece of plexiglass in the common area. 
DOC’s Special Investigations Unit assigned staﬀ to investigate this incident. The 
investigation led to the “B” post oﬃcer receiving a 30-day suspension for: 
• Failing to observe signs of life in each individual in the unit. 
• Failing to be constantly alert while on duty, observing everything that takes 
place on the post within sight or hearing, and constantly patrolling the post 
during the tour of duty. 
• Conduct unbecoming of an oﬃcer or employee. 
• Conduct of nature to bring discredit to DOC. 
• False logbook entries. 
The Board has not received OCME records reﬂecting Mr. Furse’s cause of death.  
3. Kyron Randall 
Kyron Randall entered DOC custody in 
June 2023. During the new admission 
medical screening, he informed CHS that 
he periodically used crystal meth, 
methadone, suboxone, marijuana, K2, 
and drank alcohol in the community. He 
also informed CHS of prior diagnoses of 
post-traumatic stress disorder (“PTSD”), 
bipolar disorder, manic disorder, schizophrenia, and social disorder, and previously 
prescribed medications for related symptoms. 
Age 
33 
Date of death 
December 22, 2025 
Admission date July 2, 2023 
Cause of death 
Pending 
Facility at time 
of death 
GRVC 
Bail amount 
$25,000 

14 
 
Due to Mr. Randall’s previous mental health history, which included chronic suicidal 
ideation and depression, CHS advised DOC that mental observation housing was 
most appropriate for him.12  
From July 2023 through January 2024, CHS placed Mr. Randall on suicide watch 
multiple times and referred him to Bellevue Hospital eight times. Throughout his 
incarceration, CHS reported that Mr. Randall demonstrated persistent and severe 
psychiatric decompensation as well as poor medication compliance, from zero to 
14 percent. CHS records note that, despite transfers to specialized units such as the 
Program for Accelerated Clinical Effectiveness (“PACE”) unit,13 and continued 
efforts to encourage medication compliance, Mr. Randall’s psychiatric condition 
remained unstable and could not be safely managed within DOC custody.  
Subsequently, in May 2024, the judge assigned to Mr. Randall’s case rendered him 
unfit to stand trial and remanded him to the custody of the New York State Office 
of Mental Health. On May 30, 2024, Mr. Randall was transported to Mid-Hudson 
Forensic Psychiatric Center, where he remained for restoration treatment until July 
2, 2024.  
On July 2, 2024, Mr. Randall returned to DOC custody. He underwent new 
admission screening at GRVC. During the screening, Mr. Randall once again advised 
CHS that he periodically used cocaine, marijuana, amphetamine, and heroin and 
drank alcohol in the community before being arrested. In addition, he disclosed 
that he had a history of schizophrenia. After completing the screening, based on 
Mr. Randall's previous and current mental health diagnoses, CHS advised DOC to 
assign him to the PACE unit. 
Mr. Randall was housed in the PACE unit for the rest of his incarceration. Between 
June 2025 and October 2025, he received three infractions: two for engaging in a 
physical altercation with another person in custody resulting in injuries, and the 
 
12 Mental observation housing is designed for individuals in custody who have signiﬁcant mental 
health needs and would beneﬁt from increased patient-provider engagement and enhanced 
treatment. 
13 PACE houses individuals diagnosed with a serious mental illness who require a higher level of 
care. 

15 
 
other for engaging in a struggle with the same person in custody, which did not 
result in injuries. The hearing captain dismissed the first two infractions but found 
him guilty of the third infraction. Mr. Randall’s housing assignment was not 
affected as a result of the guilty disposition.  
CHS records from admission in July 2024 through December 15, 2025 show that 
Mr. Randall generally took his medication, missing only a few doses. Beginning on 
December 16, 2025 through December 21, he went without medication. According 
to CHS records, Mr. Randall did not receive his medication for various reasons, 
including being at court, at the hospital, “no response,” and refusal. Per CHS, 
medications are available to patients prior to leaving and upon return from court; 
if a patient doesn’t receive a medication, for any reason, including non-production, 
it is available at the next distribution time. 
CHS notes reflect that Mr. Randall was fully oriented during an assessment at 9:43 
am on December 18, 2025. He complained of having a stomachache, stating, 
“[w]hen I went to court, they fed us hummus, and that didn’t sit well with my 
stomach.” CHS staff advised Mr. Randall to follow up with the nurse about his 
stomachache, but he declined. The case was discussed with the clinical supervisor, 
and that afternoon, at 1:55 pm, the unit nurse returned to Mr. Randall’s cell and 
attempted to speak to him. He refused. Later in the day, at 5:14 pm, another CHS 
staff member checked on Mr. Randall. He again complained about having a 
stomachache and loose stool. The nurse attempted to get him to exit the cell to 
check his vital signs, but he refused, stating that he preferred to stay in his cell for 
now. 
In the days that followed, on December 19 and 20, CHS staff made multiple 
attempts to get Mr. Randall out of his cell so he could be examined. Each time he 
refused, stating that he felt better. 
At 5:19 am on December 21, video footage captured the “B” post officer exiting the 
unit, leaving it unsupervised for eight minutes until the area captain arrived to tour 
at 5:27 am. Not too long after the captain completed their tour and departed the 
unit, the “B” officer once again exited the unit at 5:58 am. The unit was left 
unsupervised until 8:42 am, when the “B” officer reentered the area.  

16 
 
Medical staff entered the unit at 10:08 am. They appeared to speak to Mr. Randall 
through the cell window. Following the interaction, they appeared to relay their 
observations to a group of officers at the “B” post desk. One officer then left the 
group to check on Mr. Randall. A second officer walked over to observe Mr. Randall, 
followed by CHS staff. At 10:11 am, it appears (via video footage) that CHS staff 
requested officers activate a medical emergency for Mr. Randall after finding him 
in bed with his pants pulled down and unable to provide intelligible answers to 
questions. They observed vomit soiling his bed and linen. The “B” officer 
subsequently communicated the need for medical attention to the “A” post officer, 
who activated a medical emergency at 10:11 am. Mr. Randall’s cell remained closed 
during this time. While awaiting the emergency response staff a nurse talked with 
officers at the front of the housing area, by the “B” post desk.  
The “A” post officer did not open Mr. Randall’s cell again until CHS’s emergency 
response staff arrived at 10:22 am. Upon arrival, they observed Mr. Randall in bed, 
his pants below his waist, awake and alert. Initially, emergency response staff spoke 
to Mr. Randall from outside the cell. However, at 10:29 am, an emergency response 
staff member entered the cell, but exited after 20 seconds. Shortly after, the same 
staffer reentered the cell for 15 seconds, then continued to observe and speak to 
Mr. Randall from outside the cell. It appears that the emergency response staff 
member checked Mr. Randall’s vital signs while in the cell, as records show that his 
breathing was shallow with a respiratory rate in the low 20s. He had a rash over his 
chest and body, and he was unable to stand. After observing Mr. Randall, 
emergency response staff requested EMS. 
CHS responders report that Mr. Randall’s weight, approximately 350 pounds, 
prevented them from transporting him to the clinic, so they requested that EMS 
report to the unit. While awaiting EMS, Mr. Randall fell out of bed. For the next 30 
minutes, with the exception of the nurse briefly entering the cell two times, DOC 
and CHS staff observed him from outside his cell.  
Eventually, CHS staff entered Mr. Randall’s cell at 10:56 am, rolled him onto a 
blanket with assistance from three individuals in the unit, carried him out of the 

17 
 
cell, and placed him on a gurney. CHS staff connected him to a cardiac monitor and 
departed the area with him. 
According to DOC, EMS arrived at GRVC at 11:00 am and entered the clinic at 11:03 
am. At 11:07 am, CHS staﬀ arrived at the clinic with Mr. Randall. By 11:15 am, EMS 
was measuring his blood pressure. Records show his airway and lungs were clear, 
he breathed normally, his eyes reacted to light, and he was able to provide his 
name. His blood pressure was high, and his oxygen levels were low, causing rapid 
breathing. His heart rate was normal. Repeat vital signs measurements by EMS 
showed his blood pressure dropped slightly, but oxygen remained low, and his heart 
rate slowed. Subsequently, EMS departed GRVC for Elmhurst Hospital with Mr. 
Randall at 11:33 am. While enroute to the hospital, EMS administered epinephrine, 
dexamethasone, and diphenhydramine intravenously.  
EMS arrived at Elmhurst Hospital at 12:05 pm. Upon arrival, staff connected Mr. 
Randall to a Bilevel Positive Airway Pressure (“BIPAP”) machine. Next, staff 
intubated him and provided more fluids intravenously. He was admitted to the 
Medical Intensive Care Unit for further evaluation. Although admitted, the unit did 
not have a bed, so he remained in the resuscitation and critical care room.  Mr. 
Randall’s condition began to worsen rapidly. His blood pressure dropped and his 
organs began to fail. Despite treatment, including multiple maximum doses of 
vasopressors, he lost consciousness. Elmhurst staﬀ declared Mr. Randall dead at 
12:57 am on December 22, 2025. According to hospital records, the preliminary 
cause of death is septic shock. 
On December 22, DOC’s Special Search Team and K-9 unit searched Mr. Randall’s 
housing area. The search team did not recover any form of contraband. DOC’s 
Special Investigations Unit did not note any concerns, violations, or wrongdoing 
during the investigation. 
The Board has not received records regarding Mr. Randall’s cause of death from 
OCME.  
 
 

18 
 
Key Findings 
DOC staﬀ abandoned assigned posts  
The “B” post oﬃcer assigned to Mr. Furse’s and Mr. Randall’s housing area walked 
oﬀ post to enter the “A” station multiple times during their tours. Neither oﬃcer 
recorded a logbook entry reﬂecting that they notiﬁed their area supervisors. In one 
instance, the oﬃcer was oﬀ post for two hours and 44 minutes. DOC Rules and 
Regulations #7.05.070 prohibits correctional staﬀ from leaving their post without 
approval from their supervisor or without being properly relieved. This lack of 
supervision allowed individuals in Mr. Furse’s housing area to congregate on the tier 
and appear to use toilet paper to obstruct cameras. According to the DOC’s Inmate 
Rule Book Section 1-03(c)(27), “[i]nmates shall not tamper with, destroy, or 
sabotage any security related devices or equipment.” 
Lack of touring 
The “B” oﬃcer assigned to Mr. Randall’s housing area did not conduct tours in 
accordance with DOC Directive #4514R-C, which requires oﬃcers assigned to cell 
areas to conduct visual observations at 30-minute intervals, observing for signs of 
life in each individual. 
Unsecured cell doors 
The “B” post oﬃcer assigned to Mr. Furse’s housing area observed individuals 
accessing cells other than those assigned to them during the lockout period. DOC 
Directive #4009R-C states, “[i]ndividuals may be locked in their cells during optional 
lock-in/lockout periods. Individuals choosing to remain locked-in during an optional 
lock-in/lockout period may request to be locked out of their cells at the hourly 
optional lock-in/lockout period. Individuals who are locked-out during this period 
may request to be locked-in their cell at any time during the optional lock-in/lockout 
period.” In this instance, individuals did not need to make a request because area 
staﬀ did not lock cell doors throughout the day during the lockout period. 
Individuals out cell during the mandatory lock-in period 
DOC Directive #4009R-C notes that mandatory lock-in begins at 9:00 pm. Once 
locked in, the next opportunity to exit the cell is 5:00 am, unless there are 
extenuating circumstances. After 9:00 pm on December 6 and before 5:00 am on 

19 
 
December 7, individuals in Mr. Furse’s housing area were out of their cells, roaming 
the tier, and passing contraband that resembled a cigarette. The “B” oﬃcer 
observed the individuals but did not appear to make an eﬀort to have them return 
to their cells. The “B” oﬃcer also did not record an entry in the “B” post logbook 
noting that they notiﬁed the area supervisor that individuals were out of their cells. 
Individuals congregating in unassigned single cells 
DOC Directive #4517R, “Inmate Count Procedures,” prohibits multiple individuals 
from occupying a single cell. The policy states, “[c]orrection oﬃcers shall ensure 
each cell is occupied by the individual authorized to be in the cell. Single occupancy 
cells shall contain one individual.” On December 6, 2025, from 8:04 pm through 
8:34 pm, video footage showed another individual inside Mr. Furse’s cell. During a 
tour, the oﬃcer observed the individual and instructed them to step out. 
Inaccurate logbook entries 
“B” post staﬀ assigned to Mr. Randall’s housing area recorded inaccurate logbook 
entries that reﬂect 30-minute tours. Video footage showed that at the time of the 
logbook entry, the “B” oﬃcer was oﬀ post. DOC Directive #4514R-C on housing area 
logbooks states that logbook entries shall be made accurately and without delay. 
Adequate supervision of person in custody in distress 
The “B” post oﬃcer assigned to Mr. Randall’s housing area left him in his cell, 
unsupervised, for 24 minutes while he experienced a medical emergency. DOC 
Rules and Regulations #7.05.060 require oﬃcers to remain in close proximity to the 
individual’s cell when there is a medical emergency in order to keep them under 
close observation. 
CHS emergency response staﬀ left Mr. Randall unattended while in distress 
Emergency response medical staﬀ did not perform continuous monitoring after 
ﬁnding Mr. Randall in distress, as required in CHS Medical Policies Section 10, 
Emergency Response. From 10:36 am to 10:41 am and 10:52 am to 10:55 am, CHS 
staﬀ were away from the cell. 
Presence of contraband 
Through surveillance video, Board staﬀ observed multiple individuals appearing to 
possess paraphernalia that resembled a white rolled-up cigarette, in violation of 

20 
 
DOC’s Inmate Rule Book Section 1-03(c)(4)(103.11), which states that individuals 
shall not make, possess, sell, or exchange any number of narcotic paraphernalia or 
controlled substances.  
Covered cell windows 
Multiple individuals in Mr. Furse’s housing area partially or completely covered their 
cell windows. DOC policy prohibits cell window coverings. DOC’s Inmate Rule Book 
Section 1-03(c)(6)(105.24) states that individuals shall not block the view into or out 
of any cell by placing items on the cell window. 
Mental health history 
Mr. Ramos, Mr. Furse and Mr. Randall all had documented mental health diagnoses. 
While in custody, CHS mental health providers assessed them regularly and 
prescribed medication to treat the symptoms associated with their diagnosis. 
The Board highlighted trends cited in the Preliminary Fiscal 2026 Mayor’s 
Management Report (“MMR”) in previous reports.14 The 2026 preliminary MMR 
shows an upward trend of individuals in custody with a serious mental health 
diagnosis from FY24 (20.3%) to FY25 (20.7%) to FY26 (22.0%). 
Recommendations15 
To CHS 
1. CHS should reinforce and retrain staff on the necessity and requirement of 
performing continuous monitoring after people in custody in medical 
distress, as required in CHS Medical Policies Section 10, Emergency 
Response. 
 
14 As noted in the ﬁrst and second reports on 2025 deaths in Department custody. 
15 Pursuant to NYC Administrative Code 9-171(h), “the department or correctional health services 
shall respond to any recommendation included in any report about such death the board of 
correction posts pursuant to subdivision i of section 626 of the charter to state whether the 
department or correctional health services has determined to implement such recommendation 
and, where the department or correctional health services has determined not to implement 
such recommendation, the reasons for such determination.” 

21 
 
To DOC 
1. Reinforce and retrain staff on basic supervision, touring, and logbook entry 
practices, including but not limited to, correction officers’ responsibility to 
remain on post and remain vigilant. Training should also focus on accurately 
and legibly documenting personal breaks, meals, tours, and incidents in 
logbooks, and tour units as required by Directive #4514R-C and Rules and 
Regulations #2.30.010.16 
2. Facility leadership must designate supervisors to periodically review 
surveillance video to identify correctional staff who frequently demonstrate 
poor touring and documenting practices inconsistent with policy. 
Correctional staff found to be operating outside of policy must meet with 
facility leadership before returning to their post. If deemed necessary, they 
should also be scheduled for refresher training in the identified areas of 
deficiency. 
3. Housing area correctional staff must immediately notify their immediate 
supervisor when they observe the presence or use of contraband and 
intervene to confiscate it. DOC staff must arrange an unscheduled search of 
the unit immediately after such notification is received and drug test the 
individuals in custody assigned to that unit.17 
4. The Nunez Federal Monitor’s November 8, 2023 status report highlighted an 
audit conducted of cell doors, which found that: 
“While the doors’ operability may be part of the problem, merely 
ensuring the doors’ good working condition has not resolved the 
 
16 As recommended in the Second Report and Recommendations on 2025 Deaths in [NYC DOC] 
Custody, First Report and Recommendations on 2025 Deaths in [NYC DOC] Custody, Second Report 
and Recommendations on 2024 Deaths in [NYC DOC] Custody, and Second Report and 
Recommendations on 2023 Deaths in [NYC DOC] Custody.  
17 Similar recommendations featured in First Report and Recommendations on 2025 Deaths in 
[NYC DOC] Custody, First Report and Recommendations on 2023 Deaths in [NYC DOC] Custody, 
Third Report and Recommendations on 2022 Deaths in [NYC DOC] Custody, and Second Report 
and Recommendations on 2022 Deaths in [NYC DOC] Custody. 

22 
 
issue of ensuring the doors are actually locked and secured. 
Were the underlying causes so rudimentary, the pervasive issues 
identiﬁed would not continue once those issues have been 
addressed. For instance, at RNDC, the Department installed 950 
new doors over the past few years, yet incidents continue to 
occur in which doors were not properly secured. NCU’s security 
audit in October 2023 revealed that “Cell doors were observed 
unsecured throughout the audit.”18  
DOC must address the 2023 audit’s findings and conduct an updated audit, 
if necessary, which must aim to address these root issues. DOC must 
develop an action plan to ensure staff are securing cell doors and reporting 
malfunctioning doors promptly, along with any other identified causes of 
routinely unsecured cell doors, to be shared with the Board at least 30 days 
before implementation. 
5. Per DOC protocol, housing area correctional staff must instruct individuals to 
remove all cell window obstructions. If verbal commands to remove all 
coverings does not take its desired effect, staff must immediately notify a 
supervisor and document the encounter in their logbook. Upon receiving 
notification, a DOC supervisor must physically remove the coverings. 
Uniformed supervisory staff must regularly monitor housing areas and audit 
logbooks to ensure staff follow protocol.19 
6. Post and distribute notices advising individuals in custody to comply with 
Security Bulletin #001/13, Cell Window Obstruction/Officer Safety, effective 
 
18 Status Report on DOC’s Action Plan by the Nunez Independent Monitor dated November 8, 
2023, page 21. 
19 As recommended in First Report and Recommendations on 2025 Deaths in [NYC DOC] Custody 
and Second Report and Recommendations on 2023 Deaths in [NYC DOC] Custody. 

23 
 
January 4, 2013, or risk losing items in their cells used to obstruct staff’s 
view.20 
7. Utilize the Video Monitoring Unit for its intended purpose as noted in 
Operations Order # 2/19, to support facilities in identifying security concerns 
that include individuals using and/or in possession of illegal substances and 
tobacco.21 Improve record keeping to track and monitor individuals found to 
possess impermissible items. 
8. Enforce BOC Minimum Standard §1-04 (a)(b)(1), which prohibits more than 
one individual occupying a single cell.22 
9. Report refusals to lock-in at 9:00 pm to the Central Operations Desk (“COD”) 
and respond accordingly as noted in Directive #4009R-C on lock-in/lockout, 
which may include requesting support from other DOC units. Improve 
reporting to track and monitor housing areas where individuals refuse to 
comply with the lock-in procedures. 
10. Distribute teletypes reemphasizing that DOC prohibits officers from 
departing their assignment without their supervisors’ approval or being 
relieved as required in DOC Rules and Regulations #3.05.130.23 
11. Retrain staff operating outside of the protocol noted in DOC Rules and 
Regulations #7.05.060, which requires that they remain in close proximity to 
an individual in need of medical attention in order to keep them under close 
 
20 A variation of this recommendation was included in the First Report and Recommendations on 
2025 Deaths in [NYC DOC] Custody and Second Report and Recommendations on 2023 Deaths in 
[NYC DOC] Custody. 
21 As recommended in the First Report and Recommendations on 2025 Deaths in [NYC DOC] 
Custody, Second Report and Recommendations on 2025 Deaths in [NYC DOC] Custody, Second 
Report and Recommendations on 2024 Deaths in [NYC DOC] Custody, First Report and 
Recommendations on 2024 Deaths in [NYC DOC] Custody, and First Report and Recommendations 
on 2023 Deaths in [NYC DOC] Custody. 
22 As recommended in the Second Report and Recommendations on 2025 Deaths in [NYC DOC] 
Custody. 
23 As recommended in the Second Report and Recommendation on 2025 Deaths in [NYC DOC] 
Custody. 

24 
 
observation in the event there is a need to render first aid until medical 
response arrives.24 
12. Remain alert on post, as required in DOC Rules and Regulations #7.05.090, 
and report any individual observed tampering with DOC equipment. 
 
24 A variation of this recommendation was featured in First Report and Recommendations on 2025 
Deaths in [NYC DOC] Custody and Second Report and Recommendations on 2022 Deaths in [NYC 
DOC] Custody. 

Patsy Yang, DrPH 
Senior Vice President 
55 Water Street, 18th Floor 
New York, New York. 10041 
Patricia.Yang@nychhc.org  
347-774-7000 
               
 
 
April 28, 2026 
 
Jasmine Georges-Yilla 
Executive Director, New York City Board of Correction 
2 Lafayette, Suite 1221 
New York, New York 10007 
 
 
Dear Ms. Georges-Yilla, 
 
NYC Health + Hospitals/Correctional Health Services (CHS) accepts the recommendation the Board 
made to CHS in the Third Report and Recommendations on 2025 Deaths in DOC Custody.   
 
Pursuant to NYC Administrative Code § 9-171(h), which stipulates that in most cases the NYC 
Department of Correction and NYC Health + Hospitals/Correctional Health Services “shall respond to any 
recommendation included in any report about such death the board of correction posts…to state whether 
the department or correctional health services has determined to implement such recommendation and, 
where the department or correctional health services has determined not to implement such 
recommendation, the reasons for such determination,” CHS is providing the response below to the 
Board’s recommendation. 
 
BOC Recommendation: “CHS should reinforce and retrain staff on the necessity and requirement of 
performing continuous monitoring after people in custody in medical distress, as required in CHS Medical 
Policies Section 10, Emergency Response.” 
 
CHS Response: CHS will continue to reinforce with clinical staff the necessity of continuously monitoring 
patients who are in medical distress, as outlined in CHS Medical Policies Section 10, Emergency 
Response.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Patsy Yang, DrPH 
Senior Vice President  
 
 
 
