TITLE: How Did He Do It?
URL: https://cbcny.org/research/how-did-he-do-it
ISSUED: 2026-06-09
PDF: https://cbcny.org/sites/default/files/media/files/CBCREPORT_HDHDI-NYC-FY2027-Exec_06092026_1.pdf

REPORT  CITY BUDGET
How Did He Do It?
NYC's FY 2027 Executive Budget
Download Report
Print
Share
EXPAND TABLE OF CONTENTS
June 09, 2026
Contents
Executive Summary
Introduction
Budget Reverses Underbudgeting, Updates Revenue Forecast
Gap Closing Actions Total $12.7 Billion
New Spending Adds $3.5 Billion
Challenges Facing the Budget
Recommendations
Executive Summary

Rarely has the public paid so much attention to the New York City budget. What was actually done to solve the problems? Does it get New York out of the hot water it’s in? 

While credit is due for many positive actions, including correcting years of underbudgeting to present a more realistic picture of the City’s spending obligations, the short answer is that the City still faces the same fiscal bind.

Even as robust revenues flow into City coffers, the City still faces significant gaps.  Revenues cannot support the new and expanded programs added over the past decade without offsetting savings to make them sustainable.

Mayor Zohran Mamdani’s Fiscal Year 2027 Executive Budget is balanced, a legally required but challenging task given the magnitude of the gap. 

Still, the budget falls far short of meaningfully confronting the City’s long-term fiscal challenges. The City closes the budget gap largely with one-time resources, short-term savings, and costs shifted to future New Yorkers; recurring savings are limited. Projected budget gaps grow from $7.1 billion in fiscal year 2028 to $9.8 billion in fiscal year 2030, even before employee raises and programmatic initiatives that could add billions of dollars in annual spending. Without a major effort to shrink spending growth, the City risks a self-inflicted crisis requiring significant service cuts or uncompetitive tax increases. 

Findings
Sixty-one percent of the budget balancing actions over fiscal years 2026 and 2027 do nothing to stabilize the budget long term, including $5.0 billion in one-shots and $2.8 billion in delays and stretch-outs;
Only 39 percent of the actions have recuring impact, including $3.0 billion in savings, $1.4 billion in State aid, and $568 million in tax increases;

Recurring savings total $1.7 billion annually.
The $3.0 billion savings program is a welcome, but insufficient start that does little to transform government;     

Executive Order 12 initiatives save $1.8 billion over two years, but only 26 percent increase efficiency.
A pension gimmick—stretching out contributions—costs more in the long run and unfairly requires New Yorkers in the 2030s to pay services delivered over the next six years;    

It lowers contributions $10.7 billion through fiscal year 2032 but adds $15.6 billion in new contributions from fiscal years 2033 through 2037.
Delaying the Class Size Reduction mandate saves money for now, but leaves the City to ultimately spend $1.4 billion annually, including additional spending on high performing, popular schools;
The budget increases headcount by 869 full-time positions, with the elimination of 2,268 vacancies offset by 3,137 new positions;
Significant State support ($2.4 billion) includes $1.4 billion in recurring aid across fiscal years 2026 and 2027 and $780 million annually thereafter; and
Fully $3.5 billion in newly added spending includes $1.3 billion for administration priorities such as housing production and childcare, and $2.2 billion to support existing programs and services.
Recommendations

The City should significantly increase its efforts to shrink spending growth and restructure services.  It also should increase its rainy day reserves to protect New Yorkers from the next recession. Unfortunately, despite tax revenue growth of 4.7 percent, the magnitude of the current budget challenge makes a deposit in the Rainy Day Fund this year extremely difficult. Therefore, CBC recommends the City:

Double Executive Order 12 saving initiatives to $2 billion in fiscal year 2027 and increase by $1 billion annually thereafter. Funding effective programs, shrinking ineffective ones, and increasing efficiency can reduce spending without cuts to critical services.
Implement additional actions to reduce costs stemming from CityFHEPS, due process (Carter) cases, and other fast-growing areas. The projected 15 percent annual growth in CityFHEPS may be underestimated and is still unsustainable.
Fund additional new spending and City Council initiatives with recurring savings.
Increase the fiscal year 2027 General Reserve to $500 million to protect against economic volatility and unexpected spending shocks. 
Conclusion

Mayor Mamdani deserves credit for improving budget transparency and starting to reduce costs. However, realism and this limited level of savings alone will not create fiscal sustainability.  Acting now to generate meaningful recurring savings and strengthen reserves can help avoid more disruptive choices in the years ahead.

Introduction

In May, Mayor Zohran Mamdani presented a balanced Fiscal Year 2027 Executive Budget, as required by law. 

In a welcome change that revealed the magnitude of the City’s fiscal challenges, the mayor reversed underbudgeting that had grown to nearly $8 billion annually and proposed a budget with transparent and accurate spending obligations. Unfortunately, most gap-closing actions are one shots and gimmicks. Future gaps grow from $7.1 billion in fiscal year 2028 to $9.8 billion in fiscal year 2030. These gaps do not include the full cost of upcoming collective bargaining agreements or the new programs the mayor campaigned on, which could add billions of dollars of annual spending.

These gaps are too substantial to simply vanish due to higher revenue than forecast. To narrow these gaps and ensure the City does not have to cut critical services or raise uncompetitive taxes, the City should significantly reduce spending—increasing efficiency and shrinking ineffective and low priority programs. 

The City needs to undertake significant work to become fiscally sustainable. 

Budget Reverses Underbudgeting, Updates Revenue Forecast

Preliminary and executive budgets routinely re-estimate revenues and expenses; these actions provide $7.9 billion in resources. (See Table 1.) 

Two notable actions:

A substantial $6.6 billion upward revision to the fiscal year 2026 and 2027 tax revenue forecast, which is in line with the City Comptroller, the City Council, and the Independent Budget Office, and may be optimistic. Going forward, projected annual tax revenue growth slows to 2.1 percent a year, below fiscal monitor forecasts.
Expenditure adjustments include $1.5 billion net increase in health care costs for City employees and retirees, which are now projected to be $11.0 billion in fiscal year 2027 (8.8 percent of the budget). 

The budget presented a significantly more realistic picture of the City’s expenses—a welcome change from the prior administration’s obfuscation. The City had increasingly underbudgeted spending. The mayor rightly reverses this trend, adding $5.1 billion in fiscal year 2026, $7.3 billion in fiscal year 2027, and $8.0 billion annually thereafter. This increases the accuracy and transparency of City spending. 

The largest areas of underbudgeting that were corrected are City-funded FHEPS housing vouchers ($1.6 billion), homeless shelters ($989 million), due process special education cases ($550 million), and public assistance ($337 million). Uniformed overtime underbudgeting is only partially corrected; the $221 million increase brings the budget to $1.4 billion, still $550 million below fiscal year 2025 spending. 

Gap Closing Actions Total $12.7 Billion

To balance the budget, fund current programs, and support new priorities, the City proposes $12.7 billion of actions. Sixty-one percent are one-shots and delays. Recurring actions provide just 39 percent. (See Figure 1.) One-shots total $5.0 billion, while delays and stretch-outs provide $2.8 billion. Recurring State aid provides $1.4 billion. New taxes, mainly the pied-à-terre tax on luxury homes, will provide nearly $600 million. Welcome City savings efforts yield the $3.0 billion balance. 

State Aid Was Significant

The State’s Enacted Budget provides a substantial $2.4 billion infusion to the City over fiscal years 2026 and 2027. Fully $1.4 billion of this supports ongoing programs, for which the State will provide $780 million annually in the future. These funds largely reverse inappropriate reductions in State support for New York City: $300 million for juvenile justice programs that had been provided to all counties in the State other than New York City, $60 million to restore Article 6 public health reimbursement from 20 percent to 36 percent, $101 million for the State’s share of line-of-duty benefits associated with September 11th, $160 million in State education aid, and $160 million in additional State support yet to be identified. 

$5 Billion in One Shots Patch, Don’t Fix Problems

Nonrecurring actions patch holes but do not solve problems, leaving them to be fixed in the future. The budget includes $5 billion in one-shot actions:

$700 million in one-time unrestricted State aid;
$300 million from a cancelled State intercept of City sales tax revenue;1
$550 million reserved for agreed-to labor contracts that will not be needed;
$450 million from requiring Health + Hospitals to cover its debt service payments over the next two years;
$1.20 billion from eliminating a prior-year set aside for expenses that will not occur;2
$1.35 billion from reducing the fiscal year 2027 budgetary reserves to the statutory minimum of $100 million; and
$400 million for anticipated prior-year set asides in fiscal year 2027. 

The last two actions often occur if resources are available. This budget assumes they will happen and accelerates them. The choice leaves the City with virtually no budget cushion to deal with a revenue shortfall or unanticipated costs like greater than expected snowfall, overtime, or federal cuts. 

Delays and Stretch-Outs Preserve or Worsen Fiscal Problems

The City also leverages short-term savings by stretching out spending on pension contributions and delaying class size reduction. These actions do not reduce ongoing spending; they merely push it to the future. 

The pension stretch-out is a gimmick that delays payment of actuarially calculated pension obligations. The City had agreed to make catch-up payments to fully fund pensions over 20 years, ending in fiscal year 2032. The stretch out, approved by the State, extends the payment window by five years to fiscal year 2037. Since contributions are assumed to earn investment returns, delaying them increases the amount the City needs to contribute. Under the new schedule, City contributions for fiscal years 2026 to 2032 are reduced by $10.7 billion. These savings are then made up with $15.6 billion in higher contributions in fiscal years 2033 to 2037.  Simply put, the City will spend more later.

The State Legislature also passed legislation to delay implementation of the Class Size Reduction Mandate by two years. Giving the City more time to comply with the mandate delays spending on class size reduction, it doesn’t negate it.  The City will still be required to spend more than $1.4 billion annually to reduce class sizes, with significant funds flowing to high-performing schools. Rolling back the mandate altogether would have been more fiscally prudent.

Savings Program is Beneficial but Insufficiently Ambitious

The savings program totals $3.0 billion, about one-quarter of the total plan. Executive Order 12 (EO12) initiatives provide $1.8 billion in savings, central fringe and OTPS savings provide $571 million, and the remaining $668 million comes from cost containment in three high-growth areas: housing vouchers, homeless shelters, and due process (Carter) cases.3

EO12 established Chief Savings Officers (CSOs) in all agencies and directed them to streamline processes, improve efficiency, and reprioritize resources. It sets out the right approach to reducing spending while maintaining critical services; the order instructs CSOs to identify recurring reductions to their baseline budgets through programmatic and operational changes, including: (1) delivering services more efficiently; (2) consolidating programs; (3) insourcing functions performed by outside vendors; and (4) eliminating or sunsetting programs.

Despite this strong guidance, CBC finds that only $284 million of fiscal year 2027 savings, 26 percent, are efficiency measures. In fiscal year 2028, efficiency-driven savings increase to $373 million, or 41 percent. (See Figure 2.) Expense re-estimates from lower-than-anticipated spending are $447 million in fiscal year 2027, while revenue re-estimates are $173 million.

Agencies eliminate long-vacant positions but add new positions elsewhere, resulting in a net increase in City-funded headcount. The EO12 vacancy reduction program eliminates 2,268 positions for fiscal year 2027, saving $182 million. However, 3,137 new City-funded full-time positions are added, yielding a net increase of 869 positions in fiscal year 2027. (See Table 2.)

EO12 initiatives eliminate 197 positions at the Department of Education (DOE), which are more than offset by 1,076 new positions for instruction, pre-kindergarten program infrastructure, as well as information technology, school support and other central functions. Similarly, the Department of Parks and Recreation eliminates 40 vacant positions through the EO12 vacancy reduction program but adds 137 park workers, recreation staff, and urban rangers, for a net increase of 97 positions.

Education Contracts and Health Insurance Audit Drive Citywide Efficiencies

EO12 efficiency savings grow from $284 million in fiscal year 2027 to $500 million in fiscal year 2030. (See Figure 3.) This growth is driven entirely by contract savings at DOE. The City will reduce DOE contracted spending by $58.2 million in fiscal year 2027, rising to $254 million in fiscal year 2030, primarily through the consolidation of transportation routes and the elimination of unnecessary contracts. By fiscal year 2030, DOE contract savings account for more than half of all agency efficiency savings and represent the largest source of efficiency gains in the financial plan.

Annual audits of the eligibility of dependents covered under the City's employee health insurance plans are projected to generate $100 million in savings. Ten other agencies identify contract savings initiatives totaling approximately $14 million annually—a modest amount compared with the City's $3 billion in annual contracted professional services spending.4 Agencies also identify efficiencies related to space utilization, technology, and personnel management. 

New Taxes

The State did not authorize the tax increases requested by Mayor Mamdani, such as the personal income tax surcharge on millionaires, a higher real estate transfer tax on all-cash transactions, and increases in the City’s business income taxes. However, the State approved a pied-à-terre tax on luxury, non-primary residencies that is expected to raise $500 million annually. One- to three-family homes, co-ops, and condominiums valued over $5 million that are not owned by residents of New York City will be assessed a surcharge ranging from 0.8 percent to 1.3 percent—a rate that will effectively double or more the property tax on these units.5

While not as competitively damaging as other taxes that were proposed, the pied-à-terre tax will affect sales and development activity for luxury real estate and may reduce property values. Furthermore, technical and administrative hurdles will make implementation difficult and open the door to taxpayer challenges. Non-residents do not pay personal income tax, but they pay other taxes and consume few City services; the fiscal impact of pied-à-terre real estate may well be net positive for the City. 

The City also plans to reduce the Unincorporated Business Tax (UBT) credit on City personal income taxes by $68 million. The City contends it can implement this change without State approval. The credit lowers double taxation of pass-through income for City residents; the proposal would reduce the credit from 23 percent to 15 percent for filers with NYC taxable income over $142,000. Reducing the credit increases the double taxation of pass-through income.

New Spending Adds $3.5 Billion

The budget also has $3.5 billion in new spending: $1.3 billion for Mamdani Administration priorities and $2.2 billion for existing programs.  Priority spending includes:

$281 million for new staff, including at the Department of Consumer and Worker Protection, the Law Department, and the Department of Housing Preservation and Development;
$278 million on housing and homeless services;
$154 million on childcare programs;
$128 million on immigration and legal services;
$108 million on programs to improve affordability, economic justice and worker protections; and
$97 million to provide contractual cost-of-living adjustments.

The remaining $2.2 billion includes:

$964 million in recurring spending, such as

$110 million for Tier 6 pension enhancements;
$32 million of recurring spending for correctional health services;
$29 million for monitors at the Law Department;
$12 million for auto parts for Police Department (NYPD) vehicles; and
$6 million for juvenile justice facility needs.
$1.3 billion for one-time spending, almost entirely in fiscal year 2026, such as

$607 million for DOE, including

$349 million to hold school harmless for enrollment declines;
$53 million for HeadStart;
$20 million for Information Technology Core Operations;
$164.3 million for charter schools, related services, and teacher recruitment that's funded with State aid in fiscal year 2027 and out; and
$70 million for the World Cup;
$44 million for NYPD emergency response vehicles; and
$25 million for administrative services at the Department of Social Services.
Challenges Facing the Budget

While Mayor Mamdani took positive steps, significant fiscal problems remain. 

The short-term revenue forecast may be optimistic, which at a minimum reduces the likelihood of higher-than-expected revenue as a budget cushion and may result in shortfalls if revenues do not meet expectations.
The budget lacks sufficient reserves, leaving the City vulnerable to unexpected federal cuts or economic downturns. The General Reserve is at the statutory minimum of $100 million (less than 1/10th of a percent) and the City’s Rainy Day Fund balance is just $2 billion, when the revenue shortfall from a typical recession could reach $15 billion over two years.
The budget does not fully fund mayoral priorities, like universal childcare or free buses, or the likely cost of the next round of collective bargaining increases.
Efforts to transform government operations have been woefully insufficient. EO12 is the right approach. But CSOs should pursue more transformative changes that prioritize effective services and dramatically improve efficiency. 

Without these more comprehensive reforms, the City will struggle to achieve lasting fiscal stability and service quality.

Recommendations

To balance the budget next year, start on the path to fiscal stability, and stave off a self-inflicted fiscal crisis, the City should more substantially shrink spending. Important programs and services need not be cut. With diligent reviews and thoughtful analysis of City programs and services, largely as outlined in EO12, it is possible to leverage technology, find efficiencies, and eliminate ineffective programs.

The City also should be depositing money into its Rainy Day Fund; CBC’s proposed deposit formula would have led to a $1.7 billion deposit in fiscal year 2026. However, given the City’s fiscal challenges, it should focus on spending control this year.

CBC recommends that the City:

Double Executive Order 12 saving initiatives to $2 billion in fiscal year 2027 and increase $1 billion annually thereafter. Funding effective programs, shrinking ineffective ones, and increasing efficiency can reduce spending without cuts to critical services.
Implement additional actions to reduce costs in CityFHEPS housing vouchers, due process (Carter) cases, and other fast-growing areas. The projected 15 percent annual growth in CityFHEPS may be underestimated and is still unsustainable.
Fund additional new spending and City Council initiatives with recurring savings.
Increase the fiscal year 2027 General Reserve to $500 million to protect against economic volatility and unexpected spending shocks. 

By Chris Henrichson

Director of City Studies

By Ana Champeny

Vice President for Research
Download Report
How Did He Do It? NYC's FY 2027 Executive Budget (1.69 MB)
Footnotes
New York State has intercepted $150 million in NYC sales tax revenue for the Distressed Hospital Fund since State fiscal year 2020. This intercept was slated to sunset at the end of State fiscal year 2028. The Fiscal Year 2027 Enacted Budget sunsets the intercept as of March 31, 2026. Therefore, New York City sales tax revenue will be $150 million in fiscal year 2026, $150 million in fiscal year 2027, and $113 million in fiscal year 2028. Three-quarters of State fiscal year 2028 overlap with City fiscal year 2028. State of New York, Chapter 57 of the Laws of 2026.
Prior year payables are typically between $400 million and $600 million. This $1.2 billion adjustment is far larger than usual and unlikely to recur at that level.
Fringe savings from re-estimating the City’s payroll tax expenditure are $200 million in fiscal year 2026 and $315 million a year thereafter.
City of New York, Mayor’s Office of Management and Budget, Fiscal Year 2027 Executive Budget, Message of the Mayor (May 12, 2026), https://www.nyc.gov/assets/omb/downloads/pdf/exec26/mm5-26.pdf.
For the first two years, fiscal years 2027 and 2028, cooperative and condominium units will be valued using Department of Finance (DOF) Property Tax Roll market values. According to the legislation, units with DOF market values above $1 million will be considered pied-a-terres if the owner is not a primary resident of New York City. Because DOF market values for these units are roughly one-fifth the sales-based value for one- to three-family homes, the corresponding tax rates for the first two years are five times greater. So, for one- to -three family homes valued between $5 million and $15 million, the rate is 0.80 percent. For cooperatives and condominiums with DOF market values between $1 million and $3 million, the rate will be 4.00 percent. For cooperatives and condominiums between $3 million and $5 million in DOF market value, the rate will be 5.25 percent. For cooperatives and condominiums over $5 million in DOF market value, the rate will be 6.50 percent. State of New York, Chapter 59 of the Laws of 2026.