 
 
 
 
 
Mylan L. Denerstein 
Direct: +1 212.351.3850 
Fax: +1 212.351.6350 
MDenerstein@gibsondunn.com 
  
February 17, 2026 
VIA ECF 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
United States District Judge 
United States District Court 
Southern District of New York 
500 Pearl Street 
New York, NY 10007-1312 
 
Re: Floyd, et al. v. City of New York, 08-CV-1034 (AT),  
Ligon, et al. v. City of New York, et al., 12-CV-2274 (AT), 
Davis, et al. v. City of New York, et al., 10-CV-0699 (AT),  
2025 End of Year Monitor Update 
Dear Judge Torres: 
This is the Monitor’s 2025 year-end report summarizing the efforts of the New York City 
Police Department (“ NYPD” or “Department”)  to comply with the Constitution .  After twelve 
years of Monitor oversight, the NYPD has yet to reach substantial compliance with this Court’s  
2013 order requiring constitutional policing.  The City of New York (“NYC”) and the NYPD have 
known the problems they need to correct to come into substantial compliance.  These ongoing 
compliance problems generally fall into three main categories: (1) lack of meaningful 
accountability, (2) unlawfulness of self-initiated stops, and (3) persistent underreporting of Terry 
stops.  In addition, the Department needs to implement a Fourteenth Amendment compliance plan. 
This is not the year-end report that I had hoped to submit to the Court after four years, and 
I hope this serves as a wake -up call that the NYPD must comply with  the Constitution.  The 
residents of NYC deserve no less and there should not be a permanent monitor.   
I. Lack of Meaningful Accountability 
A. Lack of Supervision 
The lack of accountability has been a focal point of the last three annual reports, and it 
remains a focal point this year.1  Supervisors routinely approve stops, frisks, and searches as lawful 
even when they are not.  The NYPD must build a system where supervisors correct officers who 
are conducting illegal stops, frisks, and searches  and address officers who repeatedly violate the 
law.  Reliance solely on training without discipline has proven to be ineffective.  It is time the 
 
1 Twenty-Sixth Report of the Independent Monitor , Floyd v. City of New York , No. 1:08 -cv-010304-AT (S.D.N.Y. 
Oct. 14, 2025), ECF No. 969. 
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 1 of 16
 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
February 17, 2026 
Page 2 
 
 
NYPD deployed other tools to achieve accountability and , more importantly, constitutional 
policing. 
In the first half of 2025, reviewing supervisors, such as sergeants and lieutenants, continued 
to find 99% of all stops, 95% of frisks, and 94% of searches compliant.  During the same audit 
period, both the NYPD Quality Assurance Section (“ QAS”) and the Monitor team found 
substantial non-compliance.  These statistics are concerning.  The Monitor’s audit s determined 
that in the first six months of 2025, 1 1% of the stops were unlawful, while the reviewing 
supervisors determined that only 1% of these same stops were unlawful (see table below). 
Executives at the c ommand level showed improvements in identifying unlawful stops, 
frisks, and searches and identified a higher percentage of noncompliant encounters than did first-
line supervisors.  The NYPD should b uild on this by using command executives to help the 
reviewing supervisors do their jobs better, so they do not continue to find almost all stops, frisks , 
and searches constitutional.  
Table 1: Compliance, First Half of 2025 
 % of Lawful 
Stops 
% of Lawful 
Frisks 
% of Lawful 
Searches 
Reviewing Supervisors 99% 95% 94% 
Command Executives 92% 88% 86% 
QAS Audits 92% 81% 82% 
Monitor Audits 89% 73% 73% 
The NYPD needs to do more to hold supervisors and command executives accountable for 
the unlawfulness of NYPD stops, frisks , and searches.  Training and prior instructions have not 
sufficiently addressed these issues.  Therefore, it is necessary to implement more robust corrective 
actions, including discipline, for supervisors and officers who repeatedly do not comply with legal 
requirements.  There is no excuse for the continued failures year after year.  
B. NYPD Compliance Mechanisms 
The Department has created several oversight mechanisms —such as ComplianceStat and 
the Early Intervention Program—that are designed to identify problematic behavior and correct it 
early.  The NYPD leadership must ensure that these and other mechanisms create accountability 
for those who fail to demonstrate improvement after their problematic behavior is identified.  
Absent meaningful accountability for command -level executives, frontline supervisors, and 
officers on the street, the NYPD will never reach substantial compliance with the Court’s orders. 
1. Compliance Stat 
This year, the NYPD continued the ComplianceStat initiative that began in January 2024. 
ComplianceStat is modeled on CompStat (a longstanding program focused on crime reduction) .  
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 2 of 16
 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
February 17, 2026 
Page 3 
 
 
One of the purposes of ComplianceStat  is to hold command leadership accountable for the 
lawfulness of stops, frisks , and searches, as well as undocumented stops.   Precinct commanders 
and their command staff are expected to explain deficiencies identified in the Bureau -level audit 
at the meeting.  Until his re tirement in October 2025 , John Chell, former Chief of Department, 
chaired these meetings, supported by other Department executives.  With Chief Chell’s retirement, 
the Police Commissioner designated Fir st Deputy  Commissioner Tania Kinsella to head 
ComplianceStat.   
The Monitor team attended fifteen ComplianceStat meetings in 2025 , covering multiple 
Bureaus/Boroughs.  The Monitor team tracked the performance of Patrol Borough Brooklyn South 
(“PBBS”) and any corrective actions undertaken to address the deficiencies identified in the 
ComplianceStat process , beginning with a ComplianceStat meeting  on December 4, 2024, 
covering the period of September 30, 2024, through October 27, 2024.  In advance of this meeting, 
the Patrol Services Bureau reviewed numerous Body-Worn Camera (“BWC”)  videos and 
identified poor performance across several indicators , including failure to complete stop reports 
and consent to search forms.  With one exception, all the officers involved in the undocumented 
stops were assigned to P ublic Safety Teams (“P ST”) or Neighborhood Safety Teams (“ NST”).  
The command’s response was insufficient and in only one instance was a member removed from 
their special team assignment.   
Because of poor performance, PBBS was recalled to a second ComplianceStat on January 
28, 2025, covering the period December 9, 2024, through January 5, 2025.   Prior to the January 
session, the Patrol Services Bureau reviewed additional videos from PBBS commands , again 
identifying poor performance across several indicators  with failures like the previous 
ComplianceStat meeting  and a command response of only instruction or instruction with 
retraining.  A sergeant who had been previously removed from his role as a PST supervisor, in 
part due to several undocumented Terry stops, continued to work with his former team and failed 
to document one of his Terry stops involving three individuals who were stopped.  The command 
level response was limited to a negative Cop’s Rapid Assessment Feedback Tool (“CRAFT”).  The 
Chief of Department was not satisfied with these actions. 
PBBS was recalled to a third ComplianceStat on March 5, 2025, covering the period 
January 27, 2025, through February 23, 2025.  This time, the Patrol Services Bureau ’s review 
identified only two encounters (1%) where a stop report or consent to search form should have 
been completed.  And this time, members with repeated failings were subject to more significant 
corrective action, including command discipline, removal from assignment , command changes, 
and in one  command, the NST team was disbanded.  These improvements resulted from the 
command and borough level’s targeted and sustained efforts.     
The improvements made by PBBS by the third  ComplianceStat meeting show that the 
NYPD can identify and remedy unconstitutional Terry stops, frisks, and searches among its 
members, if it makes the effort to do so.   Unfortunately, however, PBBS was again recalled to 
ComplianceStat a fourth time on January 6, 2026, with a return to the same problem of NYPD 
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 3 of 16
 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
February 17, 2026 
Page 4 
 
 
commands not subjecting members with repeat failures to discipline.  ComplianceStat will not be 
effective, and sustained change will not occur, until the NYPD leadership demands accountability 
through a consistent and more focused effort. 
As part of the ComplianceStat process, Bureau/Borough commands developed compliance 
oversight plans for the Patrol and Transit Bureaus, as well as for the Housing Bureau.  These plans 
detail activities and tasks for personnel to perform , ostensibly to ensure proper performance 
through regular monitoring and auditing.   In general, these plans are a good first step as the 
Department integrates compliance into the broader management responsibility of commanders.  
However, the Monitor team’s review of the plans indicates they are overly concentrated on 
administrative issues, such as proper BWC  activation and categorization  as well as  timely 
completion of forms and reports, rather than placing emphasis on ensuring policing that is 
constitutional and free from racial bias.    
The Monitor also reviewed data on the reassignment of supervisors and officers who were 
removed from specialized units  for deficiencies as part of the ComplianceStat process.  The 
purpose of the review is to ensure that the NYPD does not return these individuals to specialized 
team assignments.  The review revealed, however, that  some officers and supervisors  have been 
assigned back to  specialized teams with the same problems  resurfacing, including engaging in 
unlawful encounters.  This shows deficiencies in corrective measures for individuals removed from 
their assignments as a result of ComplianceStat.  The NYPD can and must do more to ensure  
adherence to constitutional principles and  that sufficient measures are taken to address the 
concerns that led to the removal of these individuals in the first instance. 
The Department needs to  send a clear message that constitutional policing is expected .  
While ComplianceStat shows promise for improving compliance, leadership must demand 
accountability at the same level required under CompStat  to succeed .  As demonstrated by 
CompStat, the model can work  but only if  poor supervisor performance consistently results in 
discipline or reassignment.  Every supervisor and command must be convinced that they will face 
negative consequences for failure to demonstrate improvement.  We are confident the Department 
can address this in 2026. 
2. Early Intervention Program (“EIP”) 
In 2020, the Court ordered the NYPD to develop an EIP , which is a non -disciplinary 
initiative that uses risk -management strategies to identify and address potential officer 
performance issues early.  The NYPD Early Intervention Committee ( “EIC”) provides oversight 
of the EIP process .  The EIC is made up of Department executives who, in consultation with  
members of the Professional Standards Bureau, commanding officers, and borough executives, are 
tasked with determining what, if any, interventions should be applied to each officer under review.  
Last year, we reported that the EIP had not been successful in changing officer behavior, leading 
the Department to implement changes to more effectively address at-risk officers and supervisors.  
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 4 of 16
 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
February 17, 2026 
Page 5 
 
 
Despite changes made to the program in 2025, the Monitor team continues to find the EIP 
insufficient to reduce unlawful behavior. 
In May 2025, the NYPD implemented changes to the EIP that incorporated input from the 
Monitor.  The Department  modified its approach to more intensely focus on a smaller set of 
officers (five to ten) at monthly meetings  of the EIC because the review of a much large number 
of officers at EIC meetings, with little time to address each subject officer, proved to be ineffective 
at identifying individual problems or modifying behavior.  In addition, the Department revised the 
program guidelines to require a supervisor to be assigned to the subject officer, with responsibility 
for the subject officer during the period of the intervention.  The EIC is now chaired by Deputy 
Commissioner of Legal Matters Michael Gerber.   
Notwithstanding these policy changes, the program still falls short.  Too often , 
commanding officers responsible for intervening in problematic behavior are failing to recognize 
such behavior, and instead condone or justify it when observed, characterizing the officer as an 
“active cop .”  In some instances, officers with multiple C ivilian Complaint Review Board 
(“CCRB”) complaints were not flagged early in the system  or were sent to training on multiple 
occasions with no positive impact on behavior.  In addition, at several EIC meetings attended by 
the Monitor team, there was no mentor assigned to the subject officer, or the assignment of a 
responsible supervisor was ad hoc and done with little foresight.   This is evidence of a lack of 
accountability.  Command executives should be fully prepared to discuss problem officers.  Most 
importantly, there needs to be ongoing monitoring and the EIC must define and measure success 
for officers who come through the program.   The Monitor has provided ongoing feedback to the 
NYPD to enhance the efficacy of the EIC .  The EIC’s process has improved and the Department 
has been responsive to feedback.  Absent further changes, however, the Monitor is unconvinced 
that EIP, even as redesigned, will positively impact officer behavior. 
3. QAS Audit Results 
NYPD QAS audit results now closely align with the Monitor’s audits. When QAS initially 
began to review NYPD encounters for constitutional compliance, they concluded that NYPD 
stops, frisks, and searches were compliant at rates much higher than those found by the Monitor.  
The Monitor team has worked collaboratively with the NYPD to improve t he quality of internal 
audits, leading to these better results.  
Table 2: Comparison of the Assessment of Unlawful Stops, Frisks and Searches, First Half 2025 
However, there is both a lack of command action in response to QAS audits and—in some 
precincts—a practice of rejecting  QAS findings regarding the lawfulness of encounters , which 
 Stops Frisks Searches 
QAS 8% 19% 18% 
Monitor 11% 26% 29% 
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 5 of 16
 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
February 17, 2026 
Page 6 
 
 
presents additional concerns.  In reviewing actions taken by NYPD commands in the first half of 
2025 in response to QAS audits, the Monitor found that command staff took no action in 97 out of 
305 cases in which QAS determined that the stop was unlawful.  Where the NYPD did take action 
following QAS determinations , it was most often in the form of inst ructions (150) and CRAFT 
entries (21), with command discipline (“CD”) issued in only 8 cases.  In 29 cases, the command 
rejected the QAS determination regarding the lawfulness of the encounter.  This practice is 
inconsistent with fundamental auditing principles and undermines compliance efforts.   
II. Persistent Problems with Self-Initiated Stops and Specialized Units 
Nearly half of all reported police stops are initiated solely based on an officer’s own  
observations, rather than a call for service or information from a witness.  These self-initiated stops 
are far more likely to be unlawful than other types of encounters.  This problem is especially 
pronounced within specialized units, where most encounters are self-initiated.  Audits consistently 
show that these units conduct stops, frisks, and searches at significantly lower constitutional rates 
than patrol officers, and that supervisors fail to identify or correct this behavior. 
Self-initiated stops have substantially lower compliance rates than those which result from 
radio runs or complainant/witness information.  For the first half of 2025, the NYPD’s compliance 
rates for self -initiated stops ( 79.4% stops, 64.0% frisks, 53.3% searches) remain ed significantly 
lower than compliance rates for radio runs (96.5% stops, 91.4% frisks, 83.2% searches) and rates 
for stops based on information from complainants or witnesses (90.9% stops, 75.0% frisks, 85.7% 
searches).   
The Monitor’s Twenty-Fourth, Twenty-Seventh and Twenty-Eighth reports (“compliance 
snapshots”) provide quarterly updates on the lawfulness of NYPD stops, frisks, and searches.2  As 
noted above, the Monitor’s 2025 audits show continued failure at the supervisor and command 
level to identify unlawful stops, frisks , and searches.  The compliance rates for stops, frisks, and 
searches during encounters based on an officer’s self-initiated observations are much lower than 
the compliance rates for stops, frisks, and searches based on a radio run in response to a 911 or 
311 call, or stops based on in-person information from a witness or complainant. 
Reports from the Office of Community Liaison (“OCL”) and specific problematic 
encounters identified by the Monitor team in its audit reviews underscore the problems with self -
initiated stops.  OCL has shared an instance in which it was alleged that the NYPD twice stopped, 
frisked, or searched the same individual without legal justification.  Monitor team audits have 
identified two instances during which an NYPD training officer  or supervisor who should be 
 
2 Twenty-Eighth Report of the Independent Monitor , Floyd v. City of New York , No. 1:08-cv-010304-AT (S.D.N.Y. 
Jan. 20, 2026), ECF No. 974; Twenty-Seventh Report of the Independent Monitor , Floyd v. City of New York , No. 
1:08-cv-010304-AT (S.D.N.Y. Oct. 22, 2025 ), ECF No. 971-1; Twenty-Fourth Report of the Independent Monitor , 
Floyd v. City of New York, No. 1:08-cv-010304-AT (S.D.N.Y. May 21, 2025), ECF No. 960. 
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 6 of 16
 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
February 17, 2026 
Page 7 
 
 
modeling constitutional policing practices for new officers but instead engaged in multiple 
unlawful encounters.  These encounters and the statistics highlight the lack of accountability. 
Table 3: Percent Lawful by Type of Stop, First Half 2025 
  Stop Frisk Search 
Complainant Witness 91% 75% 86% 
Radio Run 97% 91% 83% 
Self-Initiated 79% 64% 53% 
Problems with self -initiated stops are magnified in the specialized units since the vast 
majority of stops conducted by officers assigned to these units are self -initiated rather than based 
on radio runs or information from complainants or witnesses.  In 2025, the Monitor team continued 
to review the activities of the NYPD’s specialized units, including the NST s, PSTs, and 
Community Response Teams (“CRTs”).3  Only 75% of the stops assessed made by NST officers 
were lawful.  The lawfulness of PST stops was even lower at 64%.  Also, NST frisks and searches 
were found lawful in only 58% and 54% of the encounters, respectively.  And again, reviewing 
supervisors determined that only 1% of these stops, frisks, and searches were unlawful, illustrating 
a critical gap in supervisory oversight.  
The Monitor’s Twenty-Fifth Report focused on the NYPD’s CRTs. 4  Again, the Monitor 
found an absence of adequate supervisor review of CRT stops —a consistent theme across the 
Department.  The Monitor included specific compliance targets for the specialized teams in this 
report and the NST report , stating that the NSTs, PSTs, and CRTs should achieve compliance 
levels of at least 85% by the end of the third quarter of 2025 and at least 90% by the end of the 
year.  In late 2025, the Monitor again examined NST, PST, and CRT stop, frisk, and search 
activities.  The Monitor’s preliminary audit findings show that the NYPD is unlikely to meet the 
third quarter target of 85% or the year-end target of 90%.  This is not acceptable. 
On November 7, 2025, the Department eliminated its PSTs and, in certain commands, 
replaced them with NSTs.  It is too early to evaluate the impact of this change.  The Monitor will 
track the encounters of specialized team members in new assignments (and otherwise) to determine 
whether or how the Department is holding these officers accountable for noncompliant stops, 
frisks, and searches. 
 
3 Twenty-Third Report of the Independent Monitor, Floyd v. City of New York , No. 1:08 -cv-010304-AT (S.D.N.Y. 
Feb. 3, 2025), ECF No. 952-1.  The report concluded that NST and PST officers are not performing stops, frisks, and 
searches at constitutional levels and that supervisors are not appropriately overseeing their officers.   
4 Twenty-Fifth Report of the Independent Monitor , Floyd v. City of New York , No. 1:08 -cv-010304-AT (S.D.N.Y. 
June 3, 2025 ), ECF No. 963. The report concluded that CRT officers unlawfully stopped, frisked, and searched 
individuals at higher rates than patrol officers. 
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 7 of 16
 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
February 17, 2026 
Page 8 
 
 
III. Underreporting of Approximately 30% of Stops 
Underreporting of stops has been an issue for more than a decade  and remains a problem 
today.  Officers continue to fail to document a substantial number of stops, even when 
documentation is legally required.   Although reporting has improved compared to prior years, 
nearly one -third of stops identified through audits were still not properly recorded in 2025.  
Accurate reporting is essential for accountability, transparency, and public trust.   When stops are 
not documented, unlawful conduct is harder to detect and correct. 
The Monitor’s 2024 audits of investigative encounter s found that only 61% of the stops 
reviewed were documented by stop reports.  The Monitor’s 2025 audits showed  that 71% of the 
stops reviewed in the audit s were properly documented.  Although this is an improvement from 
2024, it still shows substantially lower than acceptable levels of compliance.  The NYPD needs to 
fix this. 
IV. Discipline Report 
In the Spring of 2025, the Monitor established a Discipline Working Group (“DWG”) 
which includes representatives from the plaintiffs, the City (New York City Law Department and 
NYPD), and the Monitor team.  The DWG met throughout the year to discuss the 
recommendations in Judge James Yates’ in-depth September 23, 2024, report and determine which 
recommendations could be agreed to by all parties. 5  Based on these discussions, the parties 
identified several recommendations about which there was tentative concurrence and potential for 
submission to the Court in the form of a proposed order.  This intensive process included each 
party presenting a detailed explanation of their support or objection to specific recommendations 
and the development, in certain instances, of alternative recommendation language to address 
concerns. 
Unfortunately, the DWG had to be paused because at the end of 2025, the City sent a letter 
to the Monitor seeking to revamp the entire working group process.  The City also informed the 
parties that it was only able to agree to a few of the recommendations .  This was extremely 
disappointing and disheartening, especially given the amount of time the parties had spent working 
on reaching agreements on the recommendations.  After discussions with the Monitor and the 
parties, the City withdrew its letter reques ting to revamp the working group, but it is still only 
willing to agree to a few recommendations.   
Going forward, the Monitor team expects to work closely with select representatives from 
the parties to  return to consensus on many of the recommendations in the Yates’ report and to 
present th ose recommendations to the Court for consideration.   This effort aligns with the 
Monitor’s findings regarding accountability and reflects the critical link between discipline and 
 
5 Discipline Report, Floyd v. City of New York, No. 1:08-cv-010304-AT (S.D.N.Y. Sept. 23, 2024), ECF No. 936. 
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 8 of 16
 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
February 17, 2026 
Page 9 
 
 
changing behavior.  We look forward to working on advancing the recommendations with the new 
Administration in 2026.   
V. Fourteenth Amendment Compliance 
A.  Fourteenth Amendment Compliance Plan 
The NYPD has continued its work on development of a Fourteenth Amendment 
Compliance Plan .  The Department sought and received comments on a draft plan from the 
Monitor, as well as from the Davis, Floyd, and Ligon plaintiffs.  On December 31, 2025, the NYPD 
provided the Monitor with a revised plan .  This plan includes a Racial Disparities Review 
Committee (“RDRC”) to monitor and address racial disparities in stop, frisk, and search practices 
to ensure compliance with the Fourteenth Amendment.  The objective is to provide the Department 
with a means to quantify racial disparities in  stops, frisks, and searche s; track the trajectory of 
those disparities; identify outlier commands that are driving those disparities; examine why those 
disparities exist; and take steps to reduce those disparities. 
In October 2025, the NYPD hired Sharad Goel, Professor of Public Policy at the Harvard 
Kennedy School , as an academic advisor ; and Alex Cho las-Wood, an Assistant Professor of 
Computational Science  at New York University, to support implementation of the Fourteenth 
Amendment Compliance Plan.  The newly hired consultants will be analyzing racial disparities in 
stop, frisk, and search data and will assist the NYPD in developing responsive strategies.  The 
Monitor has reviewed the revised plan from the NYPD and provided comments to the NYPD.  The 
Monitor will closely follow implementation of a pilot, expected to begin in 2026, to assess its 
efficacy.  
To examine racial disparities in stops and post-stop outcomes, the Department will be using 
a statistical model for quantitative analysis similar to the model used by the Monitor team in the 
Monitor’s Twentieth Report. 6  Updated data and findings from this  analysis will be presented to 
the RDRC at its monthly meetings.  The Monitor team will review the Department’s analysis and 
work with the Department and its academic advisors so that appropriate action is taken to reduce 
unexplained racial disparities.   
B. CCRB’s Racial Profiling Complaint Investigations 
The Court’s remedial orders  directed the NYPD to track and investigate racial profiling 
allegations against NYPD officers.  His torically, neither the NYPD nor the  CCRB did so.  
Consistent with the Court’s orders, the NYPD began to track and investigate allegations of racial 
profiling in early 2014.  In November 2021, the City Council passed Local Law 47 (2021), which 
amended the City Charter to clarify that investigations of allegations of “racial profiling and bias-
 
6 Twentieth Report of the Independent Monitor, Floyd v. City of New York, No. 1:08-cv-010304-AT (S.D.N.Y. April 
11, 2024), ECF No. 927-1. 
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 9 of 16
 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
February 17, 2026 
Page 10 
 
 
based policing” fall under the CCR B’s “abuse of authority” jurisdiction. 7  The CCRB began 
receiving complaints in October 2022. 
At the end of 2025, the Racial Profiling and Bias-Based Policing Unit had over two hundred 
open investigations of complaints that included at least one allegation of profiling or bias-based 
policing.  For the first half of 2025, the CCRB completed investigations of several complaints that 
included substantiated allegations of bias -based polici ng.  The Police Commissioner retained 
jurisdiction over five cases involving eight officers where the CCRB requested that Charges and 
Specifications be filed ag ainst the subject officers.  In all five cases, the Police Commissioner 
found that although the officer’s conduct was improper, it was not racially motivated and therefore 
did not warrant issuance of Charges and Specifications.  
The CCRB substantiated several other complaints including allegations of racial profiling 
in 2025 and filed Charges and Specifications against NYPD officers.  However, in October 2025, 
the City advised the Monitor that the CCRB had discovered an error in how those cases were pled 
and the legal standard being applied by the CCRB, with cases charged as bias-based policing rather 
than racial profiling.  For racial profiling, the Department must prove that race was a motivating 
factor, at least in part, for the officer’s police action.  For bias-based policing allegations, the legal 
standard is higher, and the Department must prove that race was the determinative factor for the 
officer’s police action.  The CCRB is currently reviewing these cases to determine the appropriate 
action going forward. 
VI. Institute for State & Local Governance (“ISLG”) Study 
On February 12, 2021, the Court approved studies to examine compliance with applicable 
legal requirements in police-civilian encounters, racial disparities in officer’s compliance in these 
encounters, and whether these encounters are appropriately document ed.  The City University of 
New York ISLG conducted a study examining policing encounters recorded by BWCs between 
March 16 , 2022,  and May 5, 2022.  A team of retired New York State judges reviewed the 
recordings and related documents to determine compliance with the Fourth Amendment.   
The Monitor submitted the ISLG study to the Court on May 1, 2025.  The study reached 
similar conclusions as the Monitor’s audits, finding that unconstitutional stops were particularly 
prevalent among self-initiated stops (46%) and stops conducted by members of the NST or where 
an NST officer was present (35%).  The study further found that officers failed to submit a stop 
report when one should have been submitted for 23% of pe rsons stopped.  For encounters that 
officers categorized as low level encounters, the judges identified stops that were not documented 
in 3% of encounters.  The study further concluded that NYPD supervisors rarely identified 
unconstitutional stops, doing so for only 1% of stops.  The researchers also conducted a statistical 
analysis of data examining whether Black and Hispanic people are more likely to experience an 
 
7 N.Y.C. Local Law No. 47 (2021), available at 
https://codelibrary.amlegal.com/codes/newyorkcity/latest/NYCadmin/0-0-0-132892.  
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 10 of 16
 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
February 17, 2026 
Page 11 
 
 
unconstitutional stop relative to similarly -situated persons, but the results of this analysis were 
inconclusive. 
VII. Stanford Study 
The Monitor continue s to work with a group of researchers initially associated with 
Stanford University (the “Stanford team”) using machine language methods to examine the extent 
of Fourth and Fourteenth Amendment compliance by the NYPD.   The team completed a 
preliminary analysis of the use of machine learning models to identify potential underreporting of 
Terry stops and review the language used in consent search requests.  The Monitor and members 
of the Stanford team met with the Court on October 23, 2025 , to present a status update on this 
project.  The Stanford team has provided a draft report to the Monitor and the parties, and the 
Monitor expects to submit a final report to the Court soon.   
VIII. Community Liaison 
On December 16, 2022, the Court appointed Germain Thompson to serve in the newly 
created role of Community Liaison, overseeing the OCL.  As Community Liaison, Mr. Thompson 
and his team are  responsible for engaging with communit y members  most impacted by the 
NYPD’s stop  and frisk practices and communicat ing their experiences, perspectives, and 
recommendations to the Monitor and the Court.   
This year, the Monitor established an affirmative process for review and referral to the 
NYPD of problematic police encounters reported to the Monitor team by the Community Liaison.  
Through this process, the Monitor team can bring particularly troubling encounters to the 
immediate attention of Department leadership for review and appropriate action.   
Since the Monitor’s last update, the Community Liaison has enhanced community 
feedback mechanisms through implementation of technology advancements including Salesforce 
and Form Assembly.  These data collection and analysis tools enable a more streamlined collection 
of detailed input from community members, community leaders, youth, and advocates regarding 
NYPD stops, frisks, and searches.   
The Community Liaison continues to organize community meetings, listening sessions and 
other forms of outreach.   The OCL has partnered with diverse grass -roots community 
organizations and City departments focused on youth.  The OCL also has conducted information 
sessions designed to educate community members regarding the basis of stops by the NYPD.  In 
addition, in 2025, the OCL held three community forums with the Monitor, in the Bronx, Staten 
Island, and Brooklyn. 
The Community Liaison filed three quarterly reports in 2025, with the fourth quarterly 
report expected to be completed in early 2026.  These reports include benchmarks, milestones, and 
anecdotal evidence to measure OCL achievement of its objectives.  The reports not e consistent 
themes including confusion regarding the definition of a  “police stop,” community fatigue and 
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 11 of 16
 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
February 17, 2026 
Page 12 
 
 
distrust in NYPD reform implementation , and a desire for transparent communication and 
accountability.  At the same time, the reports emphasize progress with respect to the 
commencement of formal feedback sessions and the use of new technology to track feedback. 
IX. Conclusion 
The Department’s failure to achieve substantial compliance is not due to a lack of guidance, 
information, or opportunity.  The issues identified are longstanding, well -documented, and have 
been repeatedly communicated to the City and Department leadership. 
In sum: 
• Little to no discipline is imposed on officers, supervisors, or command staff for 
noncompliant stops, frisks, and searches, or for underreporting.   
• Corrective measures of training and instruction  are too often  the chosen remedy and 
otherwise fail to result in changes to officer behavior.  
• Supervisors concluded that nearly all encounters were lawful notwithstanding QAS and 
Monitor findings to the contrary.  
• ComplianceStat can only be effective with sustained, focused efforts targeting officers who 
fail to engage in lawful encounters and supervisors who fail to identify such encounters in 
the first instance. 
• In several instances, command staff rejected QAS findings regarding the lawfulness of 
encounters and refused to take action to address problematic behavior.    
• While redesigned, the EIC remains ineffective with the absence o f ranked executive 
leadership and no follow-up or measurement on how success is defined. 
• Self-initiated stops continue to have compliance rates significantly lower than stops in 
response to radio calls  or information from complainants or witnesses , with specialized 
teams performing far below officers assigned to patrol on compliance metrics.   
• Underreporting remains problematic with almost one -third of encounters either not 
reported or improperly categorized. 
  
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 12 of 16
 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
February 17, 2026 
Page 13 
 
 
None of this is surprising or new.  The NYPD can and must do more  to comply with the 
law.  I look forward to working with the Administration and NYPD to achieve compliance. 
Respectfully, 
 
 
Mylan L. Denerstein 
Independent Monitor 
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 13 of 16
 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
February 17, 2026 
Page 14 
 
 
APPENDIX 
MONITOR REPORTS 
Since the last annual update , the Monitor published six reports (in addition to the 2024 
One-Year Update published on February 26, 2025) generally focused on accountability and 
compliance.  Key findings of these reports are summarized below. 
Twenty-Third Report: NYPD’s NST and PST Units’ Stop, Frisk and Search Practices.  The 
report, filed on February 3, 2025, found: 
• NST and PST officers are not performing stops, frisks, and searches at sufficient 
constitutional levels. 
• Compliance rates for stops, frisks, and searches of NST officers were even lower than the 
Monitor’s prior report (75%, 58%, and 54%, respectively).   
• PST officers also performed poorly (64% stop, 16% frisk, 62% search compliance).    
• Both NST and PST officers conduct self-initiated stops at a much higher rate than regular 
patrol officers, and self -initiated encounters had much lower rates of lawful stops, frisks, 
and searches (65%, 38%, and 42%, respectively) than stops based on a radi o dispatch in 
response to a 911 or 311 call.   
• Supervisory oversight of NST and PST units also continues to be inadequate.   Despite 
significant numbers of unlawful stops, frisks, and searches, command -level supervisors 
determined that only 1% of stops were unlawful and 1% of frisks and searches were 
unlawful.   
• In 95% of the stop reports in which race was identified, the person stopped was Black or 
Hispanic.   
Twenty-Fourth Report: Compliance Snapshot of NYPD’s Stop, Frisk, and Search Practices. 
The report, filed on May 21, 2025, found: 
• An increase in compliance over the first three quarters of 2024, with 91% of stops, 79% of 
frisks, and 78% of searches being lawful in the third quarter of 2024.   
• The Monitor audits, however , also found that compliance rates were low for stops based 
on an officer’s self-initiated observations compared to compliance rates for stops based on 
a radio run or in-person information from a witness or complainant.  
• For the th ird quarter of 2024, the compliance rates for self -initiated stops were 79% for 
stops, 60% for frisk and 66% for searches.  
  
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 14 of 16
 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
February 17, 2026 
Page 15 
 
 
Twenty-Fifth Report: NYPD’s Community Response Team’s Stop, Frisk and Search 
Practices.  The report, filed on June 3, 2025, found: 
• CRT officers, like NSTs or PSTs, are engaging in self -initiated stops (stops based on the 
officers’ observations rather than 911 or 311 calls).  For example, 96% of stop reports 
prepared by CRT officers in the third quarter of 2024 were self-initiated stops.  
• Like NST and PST officers, CRT officers stopped, frisked, and searched individuals 
unlawfully at higher rates than patrol officers.  The lawfulness of CRT encounters in this 
audit (84% for stops, 64% for frisks, and 59% for searches) compares unfavorably t o the 
compliance rates for patrol officers found in the Monitor’s Twenty-Third Report (92% for 
stops, 89% for frisks, 77% for searches). 
• NYPD reviewing supervisors determined that all but one of fifty reported CRT stops had 
a legal basis and that all of the reported frisks and searches were lawful, even though the 
Monitor determined that there were unlawful stops, frisks, and searches. 
• Ninety-seven percent of the persons stopped, frisked, and searched by CRT officers during 
Terry stops in this audit were Black and Hispanic men. 
Twenty-Sixth Report: NYPD’s Accountability Efforts.  The report, filed on October 14, 2025, 
found: 
• In 2024, there were few consequences and little supervisory accountability for unreported 
stops and improper stops, frisks, and searches.  Meaningful accountability at the command 
level in response QAS audits was absent. 
• For the four quarters reviewed by the Monitor team, QAS identified over 4,000 improper 
stops, frisks, or searches.  In only eight instances was a  CD issued to the officer for the 
unconstitutional action.  In another 110 instances, an officer was given a negative CRAFT, 
which is the lowest form of sanction for misconduct.  In the other 98% of the incidents, the 
officer was either instructed, given training, or the violation was not addressed at all.  
• EIP has not been effective to date, with minimum interventions directed for officers who 
crossed the EIP thresholds relating to stops, frisks, and searches.  When an intervention 
was directed by the EIC, there was little to no structured follow-up to determine if directed 
corrective measures were implemented, and more importantly, the outcome of such 
measures.  EIP interventions did not appear to impact officer behavior and thus were not 
effective in addressing Fourth Amendment compliance, stop report docum entation, and 
BWC usage.  
• ComplianceStat can be an effective accountability tool to motivate command and borough-
level supervisors and executives to identify and remedy unconstitutional practices among 
their officers if there are meaningful consequences resulting from ineffective supervision.   
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 15 of 16
 
Honorable Analisa Torres 
February 17, 2026 
Page 16 
 
 
Twenty-Seventh Report: Compliance Snapshot of NYPD’s Stop, Frisk and Search Practices.  
The report (focused on the fourth quarter of 2024) , filed originally on October 22, 2025 , with a 
corrected version filed on November 19, 2025, found:  
• For the fourth quarter of 2024, overall compliance rates were 89% for stops, 71% for frisks, 
and 73% for searches. 
• Compliance rates for stops based on an officer’s self-initiated observations continued to be 
lower than compliance rates for stops based on a radio run or in -person information from 
a witness or complainant.  
• Based on Monitor team review of BWC videos, officers failed to complete stop reports in 
27.5% of stops identified in the Monitor’s audits for underreporting.     
Twenty-Eighth Report:  Compliance Snapshot of NYPD’s Stop, Frisk and Search Practices. 
The report, filed on January 20, 2026, found: 
• For the first quarter of 2025, overall compliance rates were 86% for stops, 69% for frisks 
and 68% for searches.  
• Self-initiated stops, frisks, and searches continue to have unacceptably low compliance 
rates. 
• NYPD reviewing supervisors continue to fail to identify nearly all unlawful stops, frisks, 
and searches. 
• NYPD has improved in its documentation of stops, but still almost one -third of stops 
identified in the Monitor’s audits are not properly documented. 
 
Case 1:08-cv-01034-AT     Document 977     Filed 02/17/26     Page 16 of 16