The Criminal Justice Investment Initiative: Synthesizing a Decade of Innovation — CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance (ISLG)

0

Skip to Content

About

About Us

Our Team

Careers

Funding Opportunities

Work

Our Approach

Promoting Opportunity

Optimizing Government & Institutions

Advancing Justice

Knowledge

Blog

Resources

Search

Open Menu
Close Menu

About

About Us

Our Team

Careers

Funding Opportunities

Work

Our Approach

Promoting Opportunity

Optimizing Government & Institutions

Advancing Justice

Knowledge

Blog

Resources

Search

Open Menu
Close Menu

Folder:
About

Back

About Us

Our Team

Careers

Funding Opportunities

Folder:
Work

Back

Our Approach

Promoting Opportunity

Optimizing Government & Institutions

Advancing Justice

Folder:
Knowledge

Back

Blog

Resources

Search

The Criminal Justice Investment Initiative: Synthesizing a Decade of Innovation

Apr 8

Written By Carla Sinclair

Since 2015, the Criminal Justice Investment Initiative (CJII) has used strategic investments to successfully support, develop, expand, and/or evaluate over 50 innovative community programs serving more than 34,000 people across New York City. Reflecting on the past decade of work, these briefs synthesize what we learned about the key drivers of implementation and impact, and provide a blueprint for practitioners, researchers, policymakers, and funders to shape the future of public safety partnerships.

In the first brief, we focus on how service providers broke down organizational siloes and cut across systemic barriers to enhance coordination and improve the delivery of key education, physical and mental health, and other services.
Jump to the brief .

In the second brief, we describe how providers supported healing among youth and young adults; survivors of crime; criminal legal system-involved individuals; and other groups who have been exposed to violence or otherwise experienced trauma .
Jump to the brief.

The third brief discusses how providers designed tailored strategies to reach individuals and communities who have been systematically excluded from public services , and face a heightened risk of being victims and/or interacting with the criminal legal system.
Jump to the brief.

The fourth brief explores how providers created services to support individuals reintegrating into the community following detention or incarceration , connecting them with opportunities and reducing the likelihood of further contact with the criminal legal system.
Jump to the brief.

The fifth brief describes how data-driven decision-making was embedded into each stage of the CJII, from solicitation and contracting, oversight and management, evaluation, training and capacity building, and communication and dissemination of research.
Jump to the brief.

The final brief highlights the commitment to community and participant engagement that CUNY ISLG, DANY, and CBO partners infused throughout CJII.
Jump to the brief.

Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration for Greater Impact

New York City benefits from a rich landscape of service providers with deep knowledge of their communities. Yet, organizational siloes mean people may nonetheless struggle to fully benefit from all that’s available.
Strong organizational coordination and referrals across systems and agencies can better bridge these gaps and support individuals’ interconnected needs. Moreover, this cross-systems coordination can help break down service siloes and build the collective capacity of the service landscape itself. This can have a positive impact on communities by better meeting residents’ needs—and addressing disparities in resource access that undermine community wellbeing.
This brief uses case studies from several programs to identify key ways organizations can ensure that strong, community-based, cross-system partnerships are successful in supporting participants and growing organizational capacity. Key themes from implementation and evaluation of these programs include:
Coordination requires dedicated resources .

Shared values are the foundation of collaboration.

Trust is the lubricant for transcending service siloes.

Programs must understand participants’ needs, goals, challenges, and opportunities as interrelated.

download the Brief

Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and Mental Well-Being

The impact of trauma on individual and community well - being is a pervasive public health issue. It affects people of all ages, races, ethnicities, genders, and socio-economic levels, and is also closely intertwined with the criminal legal system. Recognizing the need to address it, trauma-informed practices in social services has been a growing focus in recent years for public officials, nonprofit leaders, funders, advocates, and others looking to stem the many negative effects trauma can have.
Incorporating a trauma-informed lens was a key strategy across CJII investments to holistically support groups disproportionately impacted by trauma and/or involved in the criminal legal system. By supporting people and communities who disproportionately experience significant life stressors, they can be better equipped to process their trauma, which can lead to less criminal legal system contact, improved health and wellbeing, and safer communities overall.
This brief draws from several programs to identify key lessons learned in serving individuals, families, and communities disproportionately affected by trauma. Some key themes learned from implementation and the evaluations of these programs include:
Involvement in the criminal legal system is inherently traumatic .

Trauma-responsive programming must be flexible, inclusive, and collaborative.

Having staff whose experiences and identities reflect those of participants helps foster trusting relationships conducive to healing.

Addressing trauma requires long-term commitment.

Download the Brief

Understanding, Reaching & Engaging Excluded Populations

Public sectors such as education, housing, transportation, healthcare, and local government have long histories of benefiting more dominant social groups while leaving out others, despite their stated purpose to serve all. Certain individuals or groups are “socially excluded,” or denied opportunities to meaningfully participate in society, whether through intentional or unintentional actions and policies.
By intentionally reaching out to populations who have traditionally had lower access to services—such as immigrants, people with disabilities, people identifying as LGBTQIA+, and BIPOC—programs can enhance access to resources and break down barriers to services, increasing their ability to participate in society.
This brief draws from several programs to identify key lessons learned in serving individuals, families, and communities disproportionately disadvantaged in their access to services. Some key themes learned from implementation and the evaluation of several programs include:
Barriers and needs vary across specific populations .

Individuals within excluded communities also have different strengths and needs that should be accommodated by providers.

Flexibility in programming encourages participants to go at their own pace.

Providing training to systems, agencies, and personnel that work with these populations is vital.

Download the Brief

Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System

The United States has one of the highest incarceration rates in the world, with nearly 2 million people incarcerated nationwide. Yet, rather than deterring crime, incarceration often increases the risk of additional criminal legal system involvement. The removal of individuals from their communities erodes their relationships, career trajectories, and community ties.
Reentry from incarceration is a critical yet fraught period; without the appropriate support, many struggle to draw on the necessary resources, programs, and opportunities to resume their lives. There is a critical need for more effective diversion and rehabilitative approaches that address the gamut of needs someone may face during reentry.
This brief draws from several programs to identify key lessons learned in serving individuals, families, and communities affected by the criminal legal system. Some key themes learned from implementation and the evaluation of these programs include:
Informed program and staff approaches are key to trust and healing.
Training for staff on trauma and its effects enhances staff practices and participant experiences.

Reaching individuals most impacted by the criminal legal system requires focus and intentionality.

Flexibility in programming allows for various pathways for participant engagement.

Criminal behavior is a large, complex social phenomenon that requires addressing material needs including:
Employment and financial support

Education

Health and mental health

Download the brief

Learning from Data to Strengthen Service Delivery

New York City has a rich network of community-based organizations (CBOs) and other nonprofits that serve the city’s diverse and expansive neighborhoods. These organizations often have deep roots within the communities they serve and provide services through staff who understand the city’s challenges and strengths.
However, many CBOs—especially smaller, grassroots ones—do not have the opportunity to capitalize on this unique knowledge with infrastructure to collect, manage, and analyze data that can inform and highlight their impact. This gap begins at the funding level, with many requests-for-proposals (RFPs) failing to provide funding for data capacity training and technical assistance (TTA).
When developing CJII, the Manhattan DA’s Office and CUNY ISLG committed to Data-Driven Decision Making as a core tenet of the Initiative; specifically to “collect and analyze data and evaluate investments using empirical evidence” and to “share what we learn to inform the field so that future work can learn from CJII’s strategic investments.”
This brief describes how data-driven decision-making was embedded into each stage of the CJII, from solicitation and contracting, oversight and management, evaluation, training and capacity building, to communication and dissemination of research.

Download the Brief

Centering Participant and Community Voice in Program Design, Implementation & Evaluation

In recent years, funders and government agencies have sought to make policymaking more responsive to the needs and priorities of the communities they serve. CJII was developed through more than 250 interviews with community members, policymakers, experts, and other stakeholders; throughout the initiative, CUNY ISLG, providers, and evaluators infused community and participant voice into their program and evaluation designs to improve their responsiveness and impact.
The level of community involvement can fall along a continuum, from offering basic input, to providing approval, to collaboration and co-leadership, to community ownership. This brief explores the commitment to community and participant engagement that CUNY ISLG, DANY, and CBO partners infused throughout CJII, drawing on case studies to show lessons learned, including:
Staff with lived experience are foundational to building trust, cultural competency, and deep engagement.

Continuous learning and adaptability help address participants’ real-time needs.

Choice, collaboration, and shared goal-setting foster participant agency and long-term success.

Equitable outcomes require actively engaging participants’ intersectional identities.

Giving participants the tools to navigate external systems is essential for trust and self-sufficiency.

Participatory data collection and research designs increase validity, actionability, and relevance.

Download the Brief

ABOUT THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE INVESTMENT INITIATIVE
Under former Manhattan District Attorney Cy R. Vance, Jr., the Manhattan District Attorney’s Office created the Criminal Justice Investment Initiative (CJII) in order to use $250 million seized in international financial crime prosecutions to invest in transformative projects that will improve public safety, prevent crime, and promote a fair and efficient justice system. CJII is a first-of-its-kind effort to support innovative community projects that fill critical gaps and needs in New York City’s criminal legal system infrastructure.
CJII focuses on three investment areas—crime prevention, diversion and reentry, and supports for survivors of crime. The CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance manages and provides technical assistance to CJII contractors, and conducts oversight and performance measurement throughout the lifetime of the initiative.

Optimizing Government and Institutions CJII

Carla Sinclair

Previous

Previous

Global Roots, Local Impact: A Research Review of How Immigrants Impact the Economies, Health, and Safety of their Communities

Next

Next

[From Our Partners] Understanding the Impact of Racial and Ethnic Disparities from Arrest to Sentencing

CUNY INSTITUTE
FOR STATE & LOCAL
GOVERNANCE
10 East 34th St. 5 fl
New York, NY 10016
646-664-3480
info@islg.cuny.edu

More Info
About
Contact Us
Careers
Blog
Resources

Follow Us
Bluesky
X
Facebook
LinkedIn

Stay Informed
Join our mailing list to receive news and insights from ISLG.

Subscribe

© 2021 The City University of New York Institute for State & Local Governance. All rights reserved. Terms of Use | Privacy Policy

===== BRIEF 1: Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration for Greater Impact =====

1
Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration for Greater Impact
Building Safer Communities 
through the Criminal Justice 
Investment Initiative  
Strengthening Cross-
System Collaboration 
for Greater Impact
Research & Policy Brief
February 2025

2
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
AUTHORS 
Brandon Martinez
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance
Neal Palmer 
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This brief is the culmination of many important partnerships. 
The District Attorney of New York (DANY) and its staff have 
been instrumental partners in funding and guiding the 
development of Criminal Justice Investment Initiative (CJII) 
since 2015. 
We are grateful to the community organizations who received 
CJII funding and made possible the robust evaluation of their 
programs. Accordingly, we also thank the evaluators for their 
insightful and creative approaches to evaluation, largely during 
and after the hugely disruptive COVID-19 pandemic. In 
addition, we thank the research participants for sharing their 
experiences in the programs.
Finally, we are thankful for our CUNY ISLG colleagues—this 
report would have been impossible without Siobhán Carney 
and Patrick Hart for their leadership of CJII, and Carla Sinclair 
and Alisa Orlowsky for support in editing and design. 
This brief is part of CUNY ISLG’s series on lessons 
learned from the Criminal Justice Investment Initiative 
to promote community safety.  
 
For other briefs in the series, see here.

3
Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration for Greater Impact
Executive Summary
New York City benefits from a rich landscape of service providers with deep, local knowledge of their com-
munities. Yet, people in these communities may nonetheless struggle to fully benefit from these resources. 
They may not know where to find them, or their needs may be complex and fail to map neatly onto the array 
of services a particular organization provides. Services may also be unresponsive to the specific needs or 
cultures of a community. This lack of access, in turn, can prevent individuals from benefiting from available 
resources—unnecessarily increasing their risk of housing instability, unemployment, under-education, crim-
inal legal system involvement, and other avoidable outcomes.
Within this context, the Manhattan District Attorney’s Office (DANY) established the Criminal Justice 
Investment Initiative (CJII) in 2015 after securing $250 million to invest in impactful projects that improve 
public safety and prompt a fairer, more efficient criminal legal system. The Institute for State & Local 
Governance at the City University of New York (CUNY ISLG) is the technical assistance consultant, and acts 
as grants manager to funded programs and their evaluations. Several CJII grantees implemented or expand-
ed programs aimed at improving access to services to participants through cross-organizational 
partnerships.
These programs include:
•	
The Youth Opportunity Hub initiative supported five lead service organizations 
and their partners in connecting youth with a wide range of supports and opportu-
nities across disparate service systems in the East Harlem, Central and West Harlem, 
Washington Heights, and the Lower East Side neighborhoods. 
•	
The Silberman School of Social Work at Hunter College created the Community 
Navigator Program to connect community residents to available services that they 
did not know about or had been unable to access. 
•	
The Legal Aid Society (LAS) and Mt. Sinai Morningside’s Child and Family 
Institute (CFI) implemented a Medical Legal Partnership (MLP) to connect CFI 
families, all of whom had children with special education needs, with legal advocates 
who helped them secure special education services they may have previously been 
unaware of or unable to attain. 
•	
The NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH) developed the 
Health Justice Network (HJN) to support individuals’ well-being and address their 
health needs following release from incarceration, and thereby reducing their likeli-
hood of becoming reinvolved with the criminal legal system.  

4
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
This brief draws from across these programs to identify key lessons learned for 
ensuring that strong, community-based, cross-system partnerships are suc-
cessful in supporting participants and growing organizational capacity. Key 
themes from implementation and evaluation of these programs include:
•	
Coordination requires dedicated resources.
•	
Shared values are the foundation of collaboration.
•	
Trust is the lubricant for transcending service siloes.
•	
Programs must understand participants’ needs, goals, challenges, and opportunities as 
interrelated.
Based on these key findings, funders, policymakers, and organizations should 
prioritize the following recommendations to ensure behavioral health and other 
social services are optimizing access to resources: 
•	
Provide dedicated investments for providers to coordinate and collaborate with one 
another to amplify their collective efficiency and effectiveness.
•	
Constantly reassess organizational partnerships to ensure that communication and 
collaboration are maintained.
•	
Support the development of data management systems to improve services, coordina-
tion, and sustainability.
•	
Share learnings to promote growth and ensure sustainability.

5
Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration for Greater Impact
New York City—and many other cities across the 
country—benefit from a rich landscape of service 
providers with deep, local knowledge of their 
communities. Yet, people in these communities 
may nonetheless struggle to fully benefit from 
these resources. They may not know where to find 
them, or their needs may be complex and fail to 
map neatly onto the array of services a particular 
organization provides, resulting in them falling 
between the gaps. 
Strong organizational coordination and referrals 
across systems and agencies can better bridge 
these gaps and support individuals’ holistic and 
interconnected needs. Moreover, this cross-sys-
tems coordination can help break down service 
siloes and build the collective capacity of the ser-
vice landscape itself. Coordination allows organi-
zations to focus on their strengths while making 
maximum use of the expertise and resources of 
partners. In addition, cross-systems coordination 
and navigation can have a positive impact on 
communities by better meeting residents’ needs—
and addressing disparities in resource access that 
undermine community wellbeing.
COMMITTING RESOURCES TO 
COORDINATION FOR COMMUNITY 
PARTNERS
In 2015, the Manhattan District Attorney’s Office 
(DANY) established the Criminal Justice 
Investment Initiative (CJII) after securing $250 
million to invest in impactful projects that 
improve public safety and prompt a fairer, more 
efficient criminal legal system. The Institute for 
State & Local Governance at the City University 
of New York (CUNY ISLG) is the technical 
assistance consultant to DANY for CJII and acts 
as grants manager to funded programs and their 
evaluations. ISLG developed, implemented, and 
monitored the investment strategy for this fund, 
overseeing the grantee community, supporting 
organizational capacity building, and fostering 
meaningful partnerships across sectors, 
including government, philanthropy, and 
community-based organizations.
ISLG developed, implemented, 
and monitored the investment 
strategy for this fund, overseeing 
the grantee community, 
supporting organizational 
capacity building, and fostering 
meaningful partnerships across 
sectors, including government, 
philanthropy, and community-
based organizations.
The CJII funded numerous service providers to 
enhance coordination efforts that cut across 
systems, break down organizational silos to 
improve community safety, and promote a fair and 
efficient criminal legal system. Across its 
investments, CJII facilitated organizational 
coordination to improve services, participant 
experiences, and program impact. In one 
investment, CJII developed community hubs for 
youth-serving providers to coordinate services to 
better address youths’ interconnected needs. 
Another created a network of Community 
Navigators that created tailored plans and 
facilitated cross-organizational referrals to connect 
participants to the services they needed. In addition, 
CJII invested in coordination across the educational 
and health sectors in order to better meet the 
complex needs of people impacted by, or likely to 
become involved in, the criminal legal system. As a 
result of the many coordination strategies funded 
through CJII—including dedicated meetings, shared 
Introduction

6
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
visions, and trusting relationships—
organizations were able to better coordinate 
services, approaches, values, and resources with 
partners to improve participant experiences and 
impact. Below, we draw on evaluations of several 
of these programs to distill broader lessons 
learned and recommendations for the social 
service field and policymakers in their efforts to 
support organizational collaboration and 
resource coordination. 
STRATEGIES FOR INCREASING 
CROSS-ORGANIZATIONAL 
COORDINATION
Although cross-organizational coordination may 
take many forms, there are three predominant 
approaches to organizational partnerships and 
networks.1 First, an “integrated assessment and 
planning process” brings together different pro-
viders to develop an approach and provide wrap-
around services to meet a participants’ needs. 
Second, a case management approach typically 
involves a case manager who coordinates the 
links between a host and partner program to 
access multiple services through referrals. 
Finally, a service integration approach allows 
services to be simultaneously provided, typically 
in a single, multi-service setting. Regardless of 
the form, cross-system coordination is an effec-
tive approach to address service silos, improve 
service provision, and support organizational 
growth and development. By working together, 
organizations can provide warm handoffs to 
ensure a client connects to needed services.
Building a strong network of partners that is 
continuously communicating and coordinating 
also increases the consistency of a participant’s 
experience by aligning the way organizational 
partners value and approach clients and offering 
services of a similar quality. By expanding entry 
points to services and creating a strong, reliable, 
and consistent network of organizational part-
ners, potential clients are less likely to fall 
through the cracks of a disjoined system, and in-
stead can be connected to much-needed quality 
services and support.
Building a strong network of 
partners that is continuously 
communicating and coordinating 
also increases the consistency of 
a participant’s experience by 
aligning the way organizational 
partners value and approach 
clients and offering services of a 
similar quality.
Cross system coordination is facilitated by four key 
factors: investments in coordination and data infra-
structure, streamlined processes, coordinating staff, 
and shared values among partners. Developing and 
building robust infrastructure across partners is 
a proven method for facilitating successful service 
provision2 because it allows programs and partners 
to understand their strengths and coordinate par-
ticipant paths. It can include sharing data and 
information about participant needs, goals, and use 
of services, as well as any medical, legal, or educa-
tional records that can inform service referrals. 
Similarly, streamlined cross-organization pro-
cesses, such as intake assessments and outcome 
tracking, can make access to services more efficient 
while informing organizations about their impact 
on participants. Analyses of the National Survey of 
Children and Adolescent Well-Being support the 
use of data sharing across organizations, and show 
that youth are more likely to receive behavioral 
health services when agencies share administrative 
data with each other.3 Program staff are another 
key facilitator of successful coordination. Staff, 
particularly coordinators, navigators, and case 
managers, are critical for sharing information 
across participants and organizations, planning 
services, coordinating internal and external meet-
ings, and supporting the outreach and referral 

7
Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration for Greater Impact
processes.4 Finally, ensuring that cross-systems 
partners are well-aligned on values, approaches, 
and cultures allows them to work toward common 
goals and shared priorities.5
To achieve this alignment, partners need to work 
over time to build organizational trust, because it 
will later allow them to productively work through 
challenges, negotiations, and conflicting visions 
for programs.6 When working across systems, 
aligned values are paramount to understanding 
participants, their needs and challenges, and 
the best approaches to support their goals—and 
realizing they may not always map neatly onto 
one provider. 
Findings from the evaluations of four CJII programs 
managed by ISLG provide key lessons learned and 
best practices for ensuring that strong, communi-
ty-based, cross-system partnerships are successful 
in supporting participants and growing organiza-
tional capacity. Moreover, lessons learned from 
these evaluations identify several recommenda-
tions for the future development and growth of 
partnerships in community settings. These include 
investing funding and time in partnership devel-
opment and growth, creating strong data manage-
ment systems, and developing learning communi-
ties to promote growth and sustainability. The four 
programs are described below as case studies 
alongside evaluation findings that highlight the 
importance of cross-systems coordination.

8
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
As part of CJII funding, researchers conducted 
evaluations to assess implementation and impacts 
of selected programs. Drawing from evaluations 
including those described above, four key tenets 
emerged as critical to successful cross-systems 
coordination in CJII. Perhaps unsurprisingly, they 
closely align with, and validate, the key facilitators 
identified in the literature summarized above. 
The tenets of collaboration highlighted in this report 
are particularly useful in addressing service silos and 
facilitating coordination across sectors where 
participants have interrelated and complex needs. 
First, dedicated funding for coordination ensured 
that organizations could invest time and resources in 
coordinating their services and referrals among a 
network of partners. Second, successful collaboration 
was grounded in shared values about organizations’ 
approaches to providing services, conducting 
outreach to and interacting with participants, and 
working together to enhance individuals’ experiences 
and their own development. The third tenet was 
trust—between staff, organizations, participants, and 
communities—which enabled participants to be more 
comfortable understanding and communicating their 
own needs, as well as successfully accepting referrals 
to external organizations. Finally, to ensure that 
programs could support their participants, they had 
to understand their needs, goals, challenges, and 
opportunities as interrelated. Combined, these four 
key tenets provided the bedrock on which successful 
cross systems coordination was developed and 
sustained to enrich participants’ lives. 
Successful collaboration was 
grounded in shared values about 
organizations’ approaches to 
providing services.
Findings & Lessons Learned
COORDINATION DOESN’T OFTEN 
HAPPEN WITHOUT DEDICATED 
RESOURCES
Coordination between organizations providing 
holistic services must be intentionally and ro-
bustly funded, as well as valued as a core staff 
responsibility. To do so, organizations may partic-
ipate in regular collaboration meetings with their 
partners; create spaces for co-located staff from 
other organizations; and align and streamline 
protocols, policies (e.g., data agreements), and 
service offerings. They may also build interopera-
ble data management systems, hire and train staff 
with responsibilities beyond direct service, and 
prioritize meeting participants’ holistic, wrap-
around needs. These strategies were observed 
throughout the case studies described above. For 
example, the YOH initiative included dedicated 
funding for partners to coordinate through 
in-person meetings, co-located services, and 
cross-partner data sharing. 
This funding enabled the Hubs to make referrals, 
facilitate warm handoffs from one organization to 
another, share information and resources, host 
community events, and more, without sacrificing 
their resources for direct service provision. When 
funding for the initiative ended, coordination 
activities between the organizations decreased 
(Figure 1). Yet, the Hubs continued to coordinate 
with their partner networks, albeit at a lower rate 
than previously. This was in part due to the last-
ing impact of dedicating resources to building 
strong and resilient networks, as well as the Hubs’ 
holistic approach to providing services. 

9
Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration for Greater Impact
When youth service organizations do not effectively communicate with each other, young people can easily 
fall through the cracks and fail to receive appropriate or effective connections to care. CJII funded the Youth 
Opportunity Hubs (YOH) initiative to improve this coordination, and subsequently safety, in four 
Manhattan neighborhoods. The YOH initiative provided dedicated funding for organizational collaboration 
and coordination to five lead youth service organizations located in East Harlem, Central and West Harlem, 
Washington Heights, and the Lower East Side. Each of the lead organizations partnered with other organiza-
tions to connect youth with a wide range of services across disparate service systems in their neighbor-
hoods, including those able to address education, employment, prosocial, health, criminal legal, and fami-
ly-related goals and needs. The flexible funding allowed each of the five Hubs to develop a tailored partner-
ship model that built on its strengths and addressed the unique needs of the youth in their community.
Westat and Metis Associates conducted a process evaluation, outcome evaluation, and cost analysis of the 
YOH Initiative. They found that Hubs were successful in delivering holistic youth services because they 
worked closely with organizational partners to provide youth with tailored, wraparound supports. Hub lead 
and partner organizations implemented a variety of coordination approaches. Some employed case manag-
ers, social workers, and credible messengers to work with youth to understand their needs and goals and 
connect them to the increased number of services available throughout Hub networks. Credible messengers8 
typically have lived experiences relevant to target populations—such as prior juvenile justice system involve-
ment—and work to connect people to needed supports and services. Some Hubs co-located staff in partner 
organizations who could conduct warm handoffs for youth who had received referrals. Finally, all Hubs 
hosted regular leadership and all-staff meetings to discuss youth needs and coordinate services, such as 
ensuring case coverage and blending service offerings. Together, these approaches enabled lead and partner 
organizations to better communicate and collaborate with each other, while also building a robust network 
of partners with expertise in particular services and populations in order to better support youth. 
CASE STUDY: YOUTH OPPORTUNITY HUBS
FIGURE 1. CHANGE IN HUB COLLABORATIVE ACTIVITIES FOLLOWING 
END OF CJII FUNDING7
Percent of All Partners Providing Resources

10
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
In 2016, the Legal Aid Society (LAS) and Mt. Sinai Morningside’s Child and Family Institute (CFI) partnered to 
implement a Medical Legal Partnership (MLP). With CJII funding beginning in 2018, the MLP connected CFI 
families, all of whom had children with special education needs, with legal advocates who helped them secure 
special education services they may have previously been unaware of or unable to attain. By leveraging CFI’s 
location in a hospital, the partnership connected with families whose children were demonstrating emotional, 
cognitive, or behavioral needs to secure appropriate accommodations and supports in the educational system to 
help mitigate these challenges. 
The organizations worked together by creating a flow from the CFI to LAS: staff at the CFI referred eligible fami-
lies to LAS, where an attorney could advocate for their educational needs and connect them with any needed 
services. In doing so, the MLP reduced the amount of time it took parents to address their children’s needs by 
providing them with the legal support needed to navigate bureaucratic processes and barriers, which they other-
wise may have struggled to do. Nearly all program participants received ongoing advocacy and advice on educa-
tion issues that supported their goals, such as initiating an individualized education plan (IEP) that recognizes 
their disabilities and necessary accommodations. Other participants obtained their first IEP, achieved placement 
in a more appropriate school setting, and secured revised IEPs that allowed for increased services or supports. 
The American Institutes for Research conducted a process evaluation and return-on-investment analysis of the 
MLP between 2019 and 2022. Findings indicate that the program was successful in connecting CFI patients to the 
legal services they needed to secure appropriate educational accommodations and resources. Notably, most MLP 
participants were Black or Latine and had disabilities—a population that is disproportionately affected by disci-
plinary practices, which may lead to legal involvement that can adversely affect their education and life outcomes. 
By providing legal and mental health services through cross-systems coordination, the MLP was able to advocate 
for educational supports that may prevent this kind of disciplinary action and support students to achieve their 
life goals and avoid legal involvement. As one clinician put it, “I just think having them right here; that they’re down 
the hall ... that’s a really helpful part of it. Also, I think it aids in kind of the integration and coordination of care between 
their mental health needs, their medical needs and, and their legal needs.”
CASE STUDY: THE MEDICAL-LEGAL PARTNERSHIP
For the MLP, dedicated funding supported staff time to coordinate and collaborate across the CFI and 
LAS, including regular information sharing to ensure a more holistic and up-to-date understanding of 
participant needs. One LAS Legal Advocate described how they coordinated with CFI and how it en-
hanced service provision: 
“Every other week, we would have meetings on site at CFI with the clinical 
staff. We would talk about any issues we were having with the project and also 
individual clients that we shared [across organizations].  
So, that was extremely helpful to strategize the legal side of things and just 
make sure we were tailoring our approach to what the clinicians thought made 
sense from a medical, mental health perspective.”
-LAS Legal Advocate9

11
Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration for Greater Impact
Dedicated resources also ensure that programs can 
develop and sustain data infrastructure to enhance 
their coordination efforts. Staff positions for data 
coordinators/analysts were regularly funded across 
CJII’s investments to ensure that grantees’ data 
infrastructure was sufficiently robust to understand 
participants and track organizational trends. Across 
the programs described in this brief, a robust data 
capacity allowed organizations to communicate 
with partners, funders, and their staff. For example, 
the MLP created the necessary data sharing proto-
cols and processes to share legal and medical infor-
mation across organizations. In doing so, CFI staff 
could understand participants’ legal/education 
needs (based on progress reports and Individualized 
Education Plans [IEPs]) and LAS staff could under-
stand their medical needs (based on case manage-
ment notes). Moreover, data insights on program 
trends can also help staff improve program access. 
For instance, community navigators used their data 
learnings to better target potential participants, 
with one program staff member describing:
“How I pitched it to everyday people 
in the street is that “Hey, like we have 
this great program. We help connect 
you to the service you need” and then 
I list examples, like employment, 
housing, education — and I list the top 
three on purpose because I know that 
is based on data, and just based on 
conversations, I see that’s the one  
people want the most.”
-Program Staff, Community Navigators10
Together, dedicated resources (supported by dedicat-
ed funding) allow organizations to invest the neces-
sary time and effort to establish partners and sys-
tems of coordination, build networks tailored to the 
needs of their participants, and implement data 
management systems that support coordination. 
The Silberman School of Social Work at Hunter College 
created the Community Navigator Program in 2017 to 
connect community residents to available services in 
the community that they did not know about or had 
been unable to access. The program hired and trained a 
network of Community Navigators capable of both 
identifying individuals in need of services and ensur-
ing that they achieved their goals by connecting them 
to relevant supportive services. Effective Navigators 
were “peers” with participants in that they shared 
personal characteristics and life experiences, which 
enabled them to develop trust over time. Navigators 
met participants where they were, adjusting their en-
gagement strategies and intensity based on participant’ 
needs and capacity. They also developed extensive 
networks of service providers in the community in 
order to connect participants to the most relevant and 
appropriate supports. 
Metis Associates conducted a process evaluation of the 
program in 2020-2021. Based on interviews and pro-
gram data from program stakeholders, participants, 
and community partners, the evaluation found that 
Navigators’ ability to meaningfully connect with par-
ticipants was critical to the program’s success, as it 
allowed them to better identify needs and build trust 
that fostered cross-systems referrals. Participants also 
benefited from the wide range of available services 
Navigators had knowledge of in the community. 
Moreover, the program had a positive impact on the 
organizational infrastructure of the community by 
creating formal ties between organizations for more 
efficient referrals, and enabling hand-offs to organiza-
tions that were better suited to address participant 
needs. Finally, the program supported Navigators 
themselves through extensive training and as an entry 
point and pathway into the helping professions. 
CASE STUDY: COMMUNITY NAVIGATOR 
PROGRAM

12
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
One lead Hub organization emphasized the impor-
tance for partners to be committed to trauma-in-
formed approaches, for instance:
“It’s the alignment [that’s key]. What 
is your mission, what are your val-
ues? What is it that you see your role 
in the community is, and what is it 
that you want to bring to the young 
men and women that we are serving? 
So, where there’s commonality it’s 
easier for a blend [of organizational 
efforts] because we all have pretty 
much the same goal. At the end of the 
day, it’s that commonality that 
makes us stronger.”
 - Living Redemption staff11
Partners can develop shared values by establishing 
open and transparent communication with each 
other that centers participant experiences, hosting 
recurring leadership and staff meetings, and ensur-
ing that participants are informed of the programs’ 
efforts. Ongoing partner meetings are particularly 
important to ensure that values correspond to the 
ever-changing complexity of participant needs and 
external contexts. For example, two lead Hub organi-
zations described their partnership communications:
“[We are] upfront with our partners 
about what we want to happen and 
seeing what their expertise is to bring 
them into the fold. And I think that 
there is appetite for that. I do think 
that people are wanting to collabo-
rate. It’s just they need a North Star, 
if you will, and then the resources to 
back it up to be able to come together 
in these meaningful ways.”
- The Door staff12
SHARED VALUES ARE THE 
FOUNDATION OF COLLABORATION
For cross-system partnerships to work most effec-
tively, partner organizations should hold similar 
values with respect to their missions, their partici-
pants, and their approaches to service provision and 
coordination. The Health Justice Network’s (HJN’s) 
Community Health Workers (CHWs), as well as the 
Community Navigator Program (CNP), depended 
heavily on the shared values among partners to 
build the necessary organizational partnerships.  In 
the HJN, partner organizations all operated with 
the understanding that individuals who had recent-
ly been incarcerated had complex needs related to 
their health, and required holistic services to be 
delivered in a caring and trusting manner. 
Similarly, the evaluation of the CNP emphasized 
the importance of organizational fit to avoid poten-
tial adverse experiences when referring an individu-
al from one organization to another. 
When partners share values about the types of 
services and approaches to provision that work best 
for participants, they can better align their coordi-
nation efforts so that they build on each other’s 
strengths. Those shared practices, such as the na-
ture of outreach and the frequency of program 
interaction, enable programs to better serve their 
participants. When values and practices misalign, 
on the other hand, potential partners can encounter 
more friction, as key staff are not on the “same page” 
for outreach, recruitment, and service delivery. 

13
Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration for Greater Impact
In addition to aligning values across organizations, 
effective communication can also help organiza-
tions develop a better understanding of their par-
ticipants’ needs, articulate their organizational 
capacity and goals, and become easier to navigate 
to both participants and organizations.
TRUST IS ESSENTIAL FOR 
TRANSCENDING SERVICE SILOES
Coordination efforts between organizations are 
only effective when participants feel comfortable 
engaging with program staff, accepting external 
referral recommendations, and traveling to other 
programs/sites. Trust between staff and partici-
pants, and trust between organizations, then, are 
the link that enables these coordination successes. 
To build trust, programs have to acknowledge 
participants’ complex needs and goals, and employ 
staff who can relate to participants’ experiences. 
Staff in turn can meet with participants where 
they are, tailor their strategies to participants’ 
unique needs, and consider participant preferences 
and capacity for services and referrals. Each of the 
CJII-funded programs in this brief used distinct 
methods for building trust. Some examples 
include: 
•	 Hubs hired credible messengers from the 
community who understood the difficulty 
for some youth to cross neighborhood 
boundaries to reach organizations.
•	 The Community Navigators program devel-
oped a four-pronged strategy to build trust 
between the program and community, the 
program and community organizations, 
navigators and community organizations, 
and navigators and participants. These 
efforts are illustrated in the Community 
Navigators evaluation, from multiple angles:
The Health Justice Network (HJN) program was devel-
oped by the NYC Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene (DOHMH) to support individuals’ well-being and 
reintegration following release from incarceration, and 
reduce their likelihood of becoming reinvolved with the 
criminal legal system. It uses a network of peer communi-
ty health workers (CHWs) with lived experience of the 
criminal legal system, and an understanding of the ser-
vice landscape, to connect people who were recently 
released from incarceration with health and social ser-
vices. Because CHWs have previous legal system involve-
ment, they are knowledgeable about participants’ unique 
challenges and needs, and can use their own experience 
to help them navigate to appropriate service services. HJN 
staff conduct outreach at halfway houses, transitional 
hotels, and partner community-based organizations to 
connect with people released from incarceration within 
the preceding three years. Participants then work with 
CHWs to access health insurance, primary and dental 
care, and other services to support their mental and 
behavioral health. CHWs also work to ensure that partici-
pants’ materials needs are met by connecting them to 
employment, housing, and legal supports.  
The NYU-CUNY Prevention Research Center is conduct-
ing an evaluation of the HJN to understand participant 
experiences, the importance of CHWs’ navigation efforts, 
and the program’s impact on future criminal legal system 
involvement. Findings from the mid-evaluation report 
indicate that CHWs are successful in helping individuals 
navigate the reentry process by connecting them to ser-
vices that address their needs in a holistic manner. The 
program’s success relies in part on the HJN’s large net-
work of organizations that serve as entry points for pro-
spective participants—highlighting the importance of 
cross-systems collaboration to improve service connec-
tion and provision. The mid-evaluation report recom-
mended further strengthening the CHWs’ role by creating 
a larger network of staff who can tailor their strategies 
and services to individuals’ holistic needs and personal 
characteristics,including with regard to age, gender, 
race-ethnicity, and health needs.
CASE STUDY: HEALTH JUSTICE NETWORK 

14
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
“I will sit down with somebody for 
half an hour, 45 minutes. A lot of 
times they’re not sure if they really 
need help. They just want to explore, 
have a conversation, talk it out. And 
then after some time I draw them 
out. My method is, I try to get them 
to laugh a little bit. Offer them some 
coffee, some water, whatever we have. 
Get them comfortable. And after 
some time, you may see that the 
question comes out,  
“Do you want to participate in the 
navigator program?” 
– Program Stakeholder, Community Navigators13 
“It is a great relationship. We have 
had very open communication. [My 
navigator] has provided this safe 
space since the beginning where I feel 
very comfortable telling her exactly 
what I’m going through, what help I 
need, and why I need it.”
– Program Participant, Community Navigators14
As a result of these and similar efforts, staff at 
the Hubs and Navigators program gained credi-
bility, and participants were more comfortable 
accessing referrals outside of host organizations. 
Trust also enabled more efficient and successful 
organization coordination by expanding the 
partner network. One lead Hub organization 
identified the relationship between becoming a 
trusting partner and building a larger system of 
providers: 
“The partnership base is now being 
extended to systems. We’re being 
viewed as systems—as partners, not 
as grantees or contractors—because 
of the trust that’s been cultivated 
and the respect for the work. They 
now see [us] as a partner. That’s 
happened with Probation. That’s 
happened with DANY. Through 
this new West Harlem Reentry 
Project that the Hub has been 
brought into as a collaborator, we’re 
looking to even bring that into 
Parole and NYPD.”
- Living Redemption staff15
PARTICIPANT NEEDS DO NOT 
ALWAYS MAP NEATLY ONTO AN 
INDIVIDUAL SERVICE PROVIDER’S 
EXPERTISE AND CAPACITY 
Service provision from cross-system partner-
ships works best when organizations understand 
participant needs as interrelated, and their 
strategies incorporate this interdependence and 
individuals’ connections to other providers. The 
Hubs invested specifically in supporting holistic 
needs and opportunities that transcend typical 
organizational boundaries. Staff worked to 
address youths’ interrelated needs concurrently, 
which required them to identify services that 
met their education, employment, relationship, 

15
Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration for Greater Impact
and health goals. Because the services were 
often located across different organizations, Hub 
staff needed to be able to coordinate referrals 
and warm handoffs to partners. Staff at lead 
organizations described the process for identify-
ing interrelated needs:
“A large percentage of our popula-
tion are young adults launching 
into the real world and they’re just 
like, ‘I don’t know what to do.’ So, 
part of that is helping scaffold them 
so they can get those skills they 
need, so they can move towards 
independence, particularly those 
that are reaching the age of 24. 
They are eventually going to age 
out and you want to make sure 
when they are no longer accessing 
service from the Hub that they can 
fly on their own.” 
- NYP staff16
“Having built a trusting relation-
ship [between youth and an advo-
cate] meant that, in working on the 
youth’s [education-related] goals, 
there was an opening for youth to 
share more about a traumatic expe-
rience, [that allowed the advocate] 
to get the youth help from the be-
havioral health team. But it all 
hinged on the trusting relationship.”
 - NYP staff17
Coordinating services was also important in the 
MLP. Both organizations understood that address-
ing participants’ health needs required meeting 
their legal-educational needs and their material 
needs as well. If done successfully, the coordinated 
approach can support educational attainment, 
reduce potential criminal legal system involve-
ment, and improve the health and wellbeing of 
families and their children. Similarly, Community 
Navigators understood that meeting an individu-
al’s needs required balancing their bandwidth and 
the urgency of the various needs. For instance, 
although a participant might have articulated a 
particular “presenting need” in their Navigator 
intake session, they may have ultimately focused 
on addressing other immediate needs first in order 
to make progress toward the longer-term, more 
complex need(s). By understanding needs as inter-
related, cross-systems coordination can ensure 
that work to advance toward a goal in one area 
complements progress toward other goals as well. 

16
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
Taken together, the lessons learned from these case 
studies and evaluations point to several recommen-
dations for funders and policymakers to consider. 
First, they must allocate resources specifically to 
coordination to ensure that organizations can create 
strong networks that meet participants’ complex 
and interrelated needs. Second, they should estab-
lish mechanisms to assess the effectiveness and 
utility of organizational partnerships and adjust 
when needed. Funders must also support the devel-
opment of data management systems that tran-
scend organizational boundaries; not only will this 
improve organizational coordination, but it can also 
help organizations monitor their impact and com-
municate it to the public and to funders. Finally, 
policymakers should encourage the development of 
learning communities to further disseminate best 
practices and ensure program sustainability. 
Funders must also support the 
development of data management 
systems that transcend 
organizational boundaries.
INVEST IN COORDINATION
Funders should anticipate that dedicated funding 
for providers to coordinate and collaborate with 
one another will also amplify their collective 
efficiency and effectiveness. These investments 
should support coordination across organizations, 
including for the purposes of facilitating clear and 
transparent communication between partners, 
dedicating meeting time and space to update one 
another and share best practices, and ensuring 
ongoing data sharing. Funders should also build in 
adequate planning time in their grants to ensure 
that partnerships are mutually beneficial and that 
partners are a good fit in terms of approaches, 
shared values, and data management. Finally, 
planning for opportunities and challenges in 
partnerships should be intentional and guided by 
lived experience of participants and staff, institu-
tional knowledge, and a clear understanding of 
partners’ strengths and areas for improvements. 
In addition, organizations should invest in their 
staff by treating collaboration as a core facet of the 
job, rather than viewing it as supplemental to staff’s 
primary responsibilities. With dedicated funding, 
program staff should be encouraged to spend time 
to foster relationships with new and existing part-
ners in order to better accomplish their organization 
missions and support participants. With appropri-
ate salaries, incentives, and support, organizations 
can create healthy and sustainable workplaces for 
their employees that reward partnership. In turn, 
lower staff turnover will better support participant 
experiences and help organizational relationships 
remain consistent. 
CONSTANTLY REASSESS 
ORGANIZATIONAL PARTNERSHIPS
Participants and organizations are constantly 
evolving; partnerships should be assessed regularly 
to respond to changing circumstances and needs. 
Partners should establish regular check-ins to 
ensure that communication and collaboration are 
maintained as challenges arise and funding sourc-
es or priorities shift. In addition, at regular inter-
vals, the partnership itself should be examined 
from all sides to identify areas for improvement or 
need to go in a different direction. In doing so, 
partnerships will be better positioned to provide 
responsive services to participants as well as sup-
port organizational priorities. For instance, during 
the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, CJII organi-
zational approaches and participant needs changed 
dramatically, with a greater focus on material 
needs, shifting interpersonal relationships, and 
health challenges. 
Recommendations

17
Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration for Greater Impact
SUPPORT THE DEVELOPMENT OF 
DATA MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS TO 
IMPROVE SERVICES, COORDINATION, 
AND SUSTAINABILITY
Creating and maintaining data management 
systems and agreeing on data sharing practices 
are key to supporting strong organizational 
networks. Data systems allow organizations to 
better understand the needs of their partici-
pants, the consistency and efficiency of their 
service provision, and areas for improvement. 
Ideally, organizations within a partnership can 
use the same data management system, or at the 
very least, develop processes for regularly shar-
ing data with one another on the participants 
they serve. Doing so will often require data 
agreements to be negotiated among the organiza-
tions as well as consent from participants to 
share information with other providers. Despite 
this initial lift, doing so can profoundly trans-
form the service approach for that participant, 
reduce redundancy across providers, and avoid a 
participant having to disclose information mul-
tiple times, which is time consuming and in 
some instances may be triggering. Regardless of 
the software used, a data management system 
should be flexible to the changing program ap-
proaches and participant needs, and easy to use 
to ensure buy-in from organizational staff and 
their partners. These systems are also important 
because they allow organizations to better com-
municate their impact to internal and external 
stakeholders. 
SHARE LEARNINGS TO PROMOTE 
GROWTH AND ENSURE 
SUSTAINABILITY 
Organizational partners and funders should work 
together to develop learning communities that 
support ongoing organizational development, 
enable the dissemination of best practices, and 
ensure program sustainability. Learning commu-
nities can draw from several tools and approaches, 
including hosting internal meetings and conversa-
tions with staff and partners, developing and 
delivering training and technical assistance, and 
sharing information within and beyond partner 
networks. These approaches help partnerships 
grow stronger, as they provide opportunities for 
organizations to build new relationships, learn 
from one another, develop collective strategies, and 
increase attention to their collective priorities. 
This brief is part of ISLG’s series on lessons 
learned from the CJII. To view the full series of 
briefs, see here. In addition to this brief on the 
importance of addressing trauma as part of public 
safety and community wellbeing initiatives, this 
series includes briefs on:
•	
Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and 
Mental Well-Being
•	
Understanding, Reaching & Engaging Excluded 
Populations
•	
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for 
Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System
To access the other briefs and the evaluations 
funded through CJII, including those referenced in 
this brief, please see here.

18
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
1.	
Bunger AC. “Defining Service Coordination: A 
Social Work Perspective.” J Soc Serv Res. 2010 Oct 
1;36(5):385-401. doi: 10.1080/01488376.2010.510931. 
PMID: 21116470; PMCID: PMC2992332.
2.	
Settipani, C.A., Hawke, L.D., Cleverley, K. et al. 
“Key attributes of integrated community-based 
youth service hubs for mental health: a scoping 
review.” Int J Ment Health Syst 13, 52 (2019). https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13033-019-0306-7
3.	
Chuang E, Wells R. “The role of interagency 
collaboration in facilitating receipt of behavioral 
health services for youth involved with child 
welfare and juvenile justice.” Child Youth Serv Rev. 
2010 Dec 1;32(12):1814-1822. doi: 10.1016/j.
childyouth.2010.08.002. PMID: 21076622; PMCID: 
PMC2976554.
4.	
Morgan S, Pullon S, Garrett S, McKinlay E. 
“Interagency collaborative care for young people 
with complex needs: Front-line staff perspec-
tives”. Health Soc Care Community. 2019 
Jul;27(4):1019-1030. doi: 10.1111/hsc.12719. Epub 
2019 Feb 25. PMID: 30806000.
5.	
Macedo P, Camarinha-Matos L. “Value Systems 
Alignment Analysis in Collaborative Networked 
Organizations Management.” Applied Sciences. 
2017; 7(12):1231. https://doi.org/10.3390/app7121231
6.	
Ring, P. S., & van de Ven, A. H. (1994). 
“Developmental Processes of Cooperative 
Interorganizational Relationships.” The Academy 
of Management Review, 19(1), 90. 
doi:10.2307/258836 
7.	
Westat, Metis Associates. Youth Opportunity Hubs: 
Final Evaluation Report Fostering Collaboration. 
Building Resilience. (New York: Westat and Metis, 
2023) https://islg.cuny.edu/resources/yoh-final-
eval
8.	
Community Connections for Youth. (n.d.). 
Credible Messenger Mentoring FAQ’s. Available at: 
https://cc-fy.org/credible- messenger-policy-fo-
rum/faqs/.
9.	
American Institutes for Research. Evaluation of 
the Medical Legal Partnership Program. (Arlingon, 
VA: AIR, 2022) https://islg.cuny.edu/resources/
mlp-air-eval?rq=medical%20legal
10.	 Metis Associates. Peer-led Community Navigation 
in East Harlem. (New York: Metis Associates, 
2022) https://islg.cuny.edu/resources/commuuni-
ty-navigators-hunter
11.	 Westat, Metis Associates. Youth Opportunity Hubs: 
Final Evaluation Report Fostering Collaboration. 
Building Resilience. 
12.	 Ibid.
13.	 Metis Associates. Peer-led Community Navigation 
in East Harlem.
14.	 Ibid.
15.	 Westat, Metis Associates. Youth Opportunity Hubs: 
Final Evaluation Report Fostering Collaboration. 
Building Resilience. 
16.	 Ibid.
17.	 Ibid.
Endnotes
The CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance is a good governance think-and-do tank. 
We craft the research, policies, partnerships, and infrastructures necessary to  
help government and public institutions work more effectively, efficiently and equitably.  
For more information, visit islg.cuny.edu.


===== BRIEF 2: Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and Mental Well-Being =====

1
Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and Mental Well-Being
Building Safer Communities 
through the Criminal Justice 
Investment Initiative  
Addressing Trauma to 
Promote Healing and 
Mental Well-Being
Research & Policy Brief
February 2025

2
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
AUTHORS 
Neal Palmer 
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance
Kristen Parsons
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This brief is the culmination of many important partnerships. 
The District Attorney of New York (DANY) and its staff have 
been instrumental partners in funding and guiding the devel-
opment of Criminal Justice Investment Initiative (CJII) since 
2015. 
We are grateful to the community organizations who received 
CJII funding and made possible the robust evaluation of their 
programs. Accordingly, we also thank the evaluators for their 
insightful and creative approaches to evaluation, largely during 
and after the hugely disruptive COVID-19 pandemic. In addi-
tion, we thank the research participants for sharing their expe-
riences in the programs.
Finally, we are thankful for our CUNY ISLG colleagues—this 
report would have been impossible without Siobhán Carney 
and Patrick Hart for their leadership of CJII, and Carla Sinclair 
and Alisa Orlowsky for support in editing and design. 
This brief is part of CUNY ISLG’s series on lessons 
learned from the Criminal Justice Investment Initiative 
to promote community safety.  
 
For other briefs in the series, see here.

3
Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and Mental Well-Being
Executive Summary
The impact of trauma on individual and community well-being is a pervasive public health issue. 
Recognizing the need to address it, trauma-informed behavioral health and other social services have been a 
growing focus in recent years for public officials, nonprofit leaders, funders, advocates, and others looking to 
stem the many negative effects trauma can have. 
Trauma can be broadly defined as a response to a negative event or series of events that has lasting adverse 
impacts on functioning and mental, physical, social, emotional, or spiritual well-being. Trauma is also close-
ly intertwined with the criminal legal system. While experiencing or witnessing victimization can result in 
lifelong trauma, involvement in the criminal legal system itself can have far-reaching effects on individuals, 
families, and communities as well.10
With this context, the Manhattan District Attorney’s Office (DANY) established the Criminal Justice 
Investment Initiative (CJII) in 2015 after securing $250 million to invest in impactful projects that improve 
public safety and prompt a fairer, more efficient criminal legal system. The Institute for State & Local 
Governance at the City University of New York (CUNY ISLG) is the technical assistance consultant, and acts 
as grants manager to funded programs and their evaluations. Several of these CJII grantees—which include 
community-based organizations across the borough—implemented or expanded programs supporting heal-
ing among groups that are not only disproportionately impacted by trauma, but also face significant barriers 
to care.
These programs include:
•	
Exodus Transitional Living Community (ETC) created the Center for Trauma In-
novation (CTI), which provides trauma-informed clinical and non-clinical supports; 
training and technical assistance (TTA); and a Learning Community to facilitate the 
exchange of knowledge locally and nationally. 
•	
The Center for Justice Innovation (CJI) operated the Men’s Empowerment Pro-
gram (MEP) in East Harlem to provide trauma-informed and culturally competent 
care to young men of color. 
•	
The Mount Sinai Center for Transgender Medicine and Survey developed the 
Trauma Healing and Resilience Initiative for Transgender Survivors of Violence 
(THRIV), which provided wraparound clinical and non-traditional trauma healing 
services to transgender and gender non-conforming (TGNC) participants. 
•	
The Urban Resource Institute (URI) implemented the Trauma-Informed Abusive 
Partner Intervention Program (TI-APIP), consisting primarily of individual- and 
group-based clinical services for abusive partners. 
•	
Sanctuary for Families (SFF) expanded the FamilySafe Project (FSP), which 
offered family-focused counseling and other services to survivors of gender-based 
violence (GBV) and their children.

4
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
This brief draws from these programs to identify key lessons learned in serv-
ing individuals, families, and communities disproportionately affected by 
trauma. Key themes learned from implementation and the evaluations of these 
programs include:
•	
Involvement in the criminal legal system is inherently traumatic.
•	
Intake and assessment procedures can re-traumatize survivors.
•	
Trauma-responsive programming must be flexible, inclusive, and collaborative.
•	
Intentionally designed spaces are essential to healing.
•	
Having staff whose experiences and identities reflect those of participants helps foster 
trusting relationships conducive to healing.
•	
Meaningful treatment involves more than clinical therapy.
•	
Consistent funding remains a challenge.
•	
Addressing trauma requires long-term commitment.
Based on these key findings, funders, policymakers, and practitioners should 
prioritize the following recommendations to ensure behavioral health and other 
social services are meaningfully addressing the individual and community im-
pacts of trauma:
•	
Tailor trauma-responsive programs to the populations being served. 
•	
Use a combination of clinical and non-clinical interventions to provide more holistic 
care. 
•	
Create employment pathways for people underrepresented in the helping professions. 
•	
Incorporate flexible program policies to meet participants where they are.
•	
Dedicate funding to providing longer-term care. 

5
Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and Mental Well-Being
The impact of trauma on individual and community 
well-being is a pervasive public health issue. 
Recognizing the need to address it,  trauma-informed 
behavioral health and other social services have been 
a growing focus in recent years for public officials, 
nonprofit leaders, funders, advocates, and others 
looking to stem the many negative effects trauma can 
have.  
Trauma can be broadly defined as a response to a 
negative event or series of events that has lasting 
adverse impacts on functioning and mental, physical, 
social, emotional, or spiritual well being.1 Research 
has consistently demonstrated that exposure to a 
traumatic event is the norm rather than the excep-
tion, with more than 70 percent of adults in the 
United States experiencing some form of trauma in 
their lifetime.2 Consequently, trauma is a pervasive, 
damaging, and expensive public health problem 
affecting people of all ages, races, ethnicities, genders, 
socio-economic levels, and other social strata.C 
Trauma is also closely intertwined with the criminal 
legal system. While experiencing or witnessing 
victimization can result in lifelong maleffects, in-
volvement in the criminal legal system itself is also 
known to be traumatic for individuals, families and 
communities.10 
EMPHASIZING A TRAUMA-FOCUSED 
APPROACH AMONG COMMUNITY 
PARTNERS 
In 2015, the Manhattan District Attorney’s Office 
(DANY) established the Criminal Justice Investment 
Initiative (CJII) after securing $250 million to invest 
in impactful projects that improve public safety and 
prompt a fairer, more efficient criminal legal system. 
The Institute for State & Local Governance at the 
City University of New York (CUNY ISLG) is the 
technical assistance consultant to DANY for CJII and 
acts as grants manager to funded programs and their 
evaluations. ISLG developed, implemented, and 
monitored the investment strategy for this fund, 
overseeing the grantee community, supporting orga-
nizational capacity building, and fostering meaning-
ful partnerships across sectors, including govern-
ment, philanthropy, and community-based 
organizations.
Incorporating a trauma-informed lens was a key 
strategy across investments to holistically support 
groups disproportionately impacted by trauma and/
or involved in the criminal legal system. Accordingly, 
the CJII funded numerous service providers to sup-
port healing among  youth and young adults; survi-
vors of crime; system-involved individuals; and other 
groups who have been exposed to violence or other-
wise experienced trauma. By supporting groups who 
disproportionately experience significant life stress-
ors, individuals, families, and communities can be 
better equipped to process their trauma, which can 
lead to avoidance of the criminal legal system; im-
proved health and wellbeing; and safer communities 
overall. Below, we draw on evaluations of several of 
these programs to distill broader lessons learned and 
recommendations for the social service field and 
policymakers in their efforts to address trauma and 
improve public safety and wellbeing.  
Introduction

6
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
TRAUMA AND ITS EFFECTS 
One of the most common forms of trauma in the 
United States is exposure to violence in the home or 
community. Violence exposure can be experienced 
directly (e.g., as a survivor of crime) or indirectly (e.g., 
as a witness to violence); both can be physically and 
emotionally damaging and can result in detrimental 
effects to long-term health and well-being. 
Experiencing repeated traumatic events, also called 
complex trauma, has an especially long-lasting 
impact not only on an individual but also on their 
families and communities. 
Survivors of domestic (DV) and/or intimate partner 
violence (IPV) for instance, can experience dimin-
ished psychological and physical health, financial 
hardship, and strained social relationships.4 In addi-
tion, survivors may have feelings of helplessness 
resulting from the lack of control they had over their 
traumatic event, which can permeate into other areas 
of life.5 Relatedly, children exposed to domestic vio-
lence may face socioemotional, cognitive, or even 
physical health problems. These experiences may 
include difficulty forming and maintaining relation-
ships; trouble concentrating in school; or impaired 
development that persists into adulthood.6 Moreover, 
children exposed to DV/IPV may associate the use of 
violence to maintain power in relationships as ac-
ceptable expressions of intimacy and affection.14
Trauma and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 
also disproportionately impact marginalized groups 
relative to the general population. The LGBTQIA+ 
community—and more specifically, transgender and 
gender non-conforming (TGNB) individualsA,B—face 
higher rates of violence and trauma exposure com-
pared to similarly situated cisgender individuals, the 
effects of which are exacerbated by a variety of social, 
A     Transgender: denoting or relating to a person whose 
sense of personal identity and gender does not corre-
spond with their birth sex.
B     Gender non-binary: non-binary or genderqueer is an 
umbrella term for gender identities that are neither male 
nor female - identities that are outside the gender binary.
economic, and cultural factors. For instance, TGNB 
individuals experience higher rates of hate crimes as 
well as physical and sexual assault: one study found 
that approximately 60 percent of TGNB survey 
respondents reported poor mental health (i.e., symp-
toms of traumatic stress, depression, anxiety), with 
TGNB persons of color faring most poorly due to 
systemic discrimination.7 These traumatic stressors 
are compounded by elevated rates of housing insta-
bility, poverty, unemployment, and involvement in 
the criminal legal system, all of which contribute to 
poor outcomes among this population.8
In addition to its impact on physical and mental 
health, untreated trauma resulting from violent 
events can have implications for community safety 
and policy. Research shows that young people of 
color are at disproportionate risk for trauma expo-
sure, which is rooted in and exacerbated by larger 
systemic forces including institutional racism, segre-
gation, inequity, and poverty.11 Individuals who have 
traumatic reactions to violence exposure may under-
report those events due to shame, fear of retaliation, 
or distrust of law enforcement, resulting in violent 
perpetrators continuing to engage in the behavior 
without consequences while also impeding survi-
vors’ ability to get support to deal with the trauma 
they have experienced.9
Illustrating trauma as both a cause and effect, perpe-
trators of violence were often victimized or exposed 
to violence during their developmental years, leading 
to a perpetual cycle of violence and involvement in 
the criminal legal system. For instance, one study 
exploring the prevalence of PTSD among incarcerat-
ed men found that nearly half had experienced some 
form of physical trauma prior to their incarceration.10 
Researchers also assert that the correctional setting 
is inherently detrimental to mental health and well-
being for several reasons, including family discon-
nection; loss of autonomy and purpose; unpredict-
ability of the environment; cruel conditions, over-
crowding and solitary confinement; and 

7
Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and Mental Well-Being
experiencing or witnessing violence, the effects of which can persist long after individuals are released.18 This is 
particularly relevant for Black and Latine individuals because they are overrepresented in the incarcerated popu-
lation, which in turn renders them disproportionately likely to be impacted by trauma experienced in the crimi-
nal legal system.17
Despite their profound effects, many survivors of violence and trauma do not access formal supports for myriad 
reasons, ranging from general distrust of service providers; language barriers; lack of culturally competent pro-
gramming; fear of discrimination; gender norms that inhibit help-seeking behavior; nonrecognition of one’s own 
trauma; and a lack of knowledge or awareness of available resources. Taken together, vulnerable and system-in-
volved groups (e.g., children and youth; perpetrators of violence; people of color; LGBTQIA+) experience higher 
rates of trauma compared to the general population, but are also less likely to receive supportive services, result-
ing in disproportionate outcomes in care and higher, unnecessary involvement in the criminal legal system. 
Accordingly, treating trauma is a key strategy in addressing many social challenges, but treatments must be 
tailored and promoted to underserved populations in particular to achieve their full potential.

8
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
Findings & Lessons Learned
As part of CJII funding, researchers conducted 
evaluations to assess implementation and impacts 
of selected programs. For the projects centering 
trauma and healing, these evaluations highlight 
several factors that enhance or inhibit the trauma 
recovery journeys of individuals, families and 
communities. Broader evaluation findings assert 
that system involvement is inherently traumatic, 
meaning services must account for individuals’ 
experiences before, during and after interfacing in 
the criminal legal system. Trauma-informed ser-
vice provision is more than just therapy; it requires 
intentional planning in all facets of programming, 
including: intake and assessment procedures; 
flexibility and availability of service options; em-
ploying staff that reflect participant identities; a 
mix of clinical and non-clinical approaches; and 
even careful consideration of the physical space in 
which treatment takes place. Moreover, programs 
are often underfunded, which undermines the 
provision of longer-term care and strategies.
INVOLVEMENT IN THE CRIMINAL LEGAL 
SYSTEM IS INHERENTLY TRAUMATIC 
Interfacing with the criminal legal system can 
undermine perceptions of safety and the well-be-
ing of individuals and communities. In response to 
rising violence in West Harlem, DANY and the 
New York City Police Department (NYPD) conduct-
ed a large-scale intervention in 2014 that resulted 
in the arrest and prosecution of 103 men who 
belonged to rival gangs/crews. While violent crime 
rates decreased in the vicinity following the inter-
vention, the family disruption and separation that 
occurred as a result of the intervention strained 
relationships and spurred mistrust between com-
munity members and law enforcement. And as 
those men would eventually return to the 
community, questions remained as to how the 
incarcerated individuals would be supported 
through the substantial barriers to successful 
reentry.
The FamilySafe Project – operated in tandem with 
Sanctuary for Families (SFF) and STEPS to End 
Violence (STEPS) – provided family-focused coun-
seling and other services to survivors of gen-
der-based violence (GBV) and their children be-
tween 2017 and 2020. SFF and STEPS provided 
clinical, legal, economic empowerment, shelter and 
other services to survivors of DV, sex trafficking and 
other forms of GBV. 
The FSP employed a family-focused approach to 
providing evidence-based, trauma-informed coun-
seling and support to survivors and their families.
The program offered individual counseling for 
children and adults; family therapy and workshops; 
case management; regular assessment of PTSD 
symptomology; and external referrals for additional 
supports. Participants had the option of engaging 
with one or all structured counseling models, in-
cluding Parenting Journey, Child-Parent 
Psychotherapy for Family Violence (CPP-FV) and 
trauma-focused cognitive behavioral therapy 
(TF-CBT).15
The Urban Institute conducted an evaluation of FSP 
with process and outcome components. Data sourc-
es included interviews with counselors and clients, 
analysis of performance data, review of program 
documents, and surveys of adult participants. The 
outcome evaluation also included a tool validation 
study of the FSPAT (FamilySafe Project Assessment 
Tool), a tailored assessment that encompassed 
elements of the PTSD checklist for the DSM-5, the 
Protective Factors Instrument (PFI) for families and 
the Parent Report of Post-Traumatic Symptoms 
(PROPS) for children. Counselors used the FSPAT to 
measure PTSD symptoms and family functioning of 
parents and children.
CASE STUDY: FAMILYSAFE PROJECT

9
Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and Mental Well-Being
The West Harlem Community Reentry and 
Restoration Project (WHCRRP) employed Credible 
MessengersC to provide wraparound care to indi-
viduals incarcerated as a result of the intervention 
as well as to the impacted Harlem neighborhoods. 
They promoted healing within the community by 
way of restorative justiceD practices. Evaluation 
results  demonstrated that while participants 
reflected positively on the services they had re-
ceived, Credible Messengers noted that partici-
pants were often overwhelmed by the reentry 
process and needed additional mental health sup-
ports to heal from trauma they experienced prior 
to and during their incarceration. Failing to ad-
dress this trauma can permeate all facets of every-
day life and inhibit individuals; paths to self-suffi-
ciency (e.g., employment, education), thereby in-
creasing the risk of future criminal legal system 
involvement.
INTAKE AND ASSESSMENT 
PROCEDURES CAN RE-TRAUMATIZE 
SURVIVORS
Survivors of trauma require individualized, com-
prehensive intake and assessment procedures to 
ensure services are tailored to address their specif-
ic needs and goals. However, such tools can also 
C     Credible Messengers are mentors who have pri-
or system involvement (e.g., criminal legal system) or 
similar relevant experiences to the population they serve. 
They assist individuals in accessing services and supports 
and fostering positive behavior change through transfor-
mative personal relationships.
D     Restorative Justice is a theory of justice that seeks 
to address harm and foster healing through collective 
processes. Applications can include, but are not limited 
to, peacekeeping circles and family group conferencing.
Since 2017, Exodus Transitional Community (ETC) has 
developed and operated the Center for Trauma 
Innovation (CTI). The CTI serves individuals who have 
experienced chronic trauma related to incarceration, 
poverty, systemic racism and experiencing or witness-
ing community violence, among other significant 
stressors. To meaningfully serve these populations, the 
CTI works along three main prongs: first, participants 
can access culturally competent, trauma-informed 
clinical and non-clinical healing services. Second, the 
CTI provides training and technical assistance (TTA) to 
staff in-house as well as to local and national organiza-
tions to enhance the provision of trauma-informed 
services. Last, the CTI is developing a Learning 
Community of a national network of organizations who 
seek to innovate and advance trauma-informed care for 
justice-impacted individuals, families, and communi-
ties more broadly.
Among CTI participants enrolled from September 2021 
through July 2024 (N=1,058), 84 percent reported being 
previously incarcerated, but more specifically, approxi-
mately 65 percent of all participants are currently 
involved in the criminal legal system (e.g., on probation 
or parole). Notably, 97 percent of participants reported a 
history of trauma, with 42 percent having experienced 
acute trauma (e.g., physical assault); 38 percent chronic 
trauma (e.g., incarceration, domestic violence); and 17 
percent experiencing complex trauma (e.g., child abuse).
The Icahn School of Medicine is conducting a process 
and outcome evaluation of the development of the CTI. 
The study uses a community-based participatory re-
search (CBPR) framework and includes participant 
interviews and focus groups; clinical and non-clinical 
staff interviews; observations of direct services and 
TTA sessions; analysis of program data; as well as 
participant and staff questionnaires.
CASE STUDY: CENTER FOR TRAUMA 
INNOVATION

10
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
be re-traumatizing and can interfere with treatment 
progress. The FamilySafe Project developed the 
FamilySafe Project Assessment Tool (FSPAT) in 
order to coordinate the intake process across multi-
ple staff members and eliminate redundant, trigger-
ing intake experiences. 
Even with commitment to this vision, however, stake-
holders may still struggle to achieve their aims in all 
circumstances. For instance, many FSP clients were in 
crisis and experiencing traumatic symptoms upon 
arrival, and others had larger families which in turn 
CASE STUDY: TRAUMA-INFORMED ABUSIVE PARTNER INTERVENTION PROGRAM 
lengthened the intake process so that all members of 
the family could be part of the treatment approach. 
As one clinician shared:
“How can we be as concise as possible in the 
questions we’re asking? Because we’re not the 
first person who’s asked those questions.”
In response, clinicians tailored their approach based 
on their perceived needs of the client, such as re-
wording questions or providing breaks.
 The Trauma-Informed Abusive Partner Intervention Program (TI-APIP) is operated by the Urban Resource 
Institute. The program aims to hold abusive individuals accountable by helping them understand and take respon-
sibility for their abusive behavior; develop alternatives to using violence and control in relationships; and change 
the attitudes and beliefs used to justify the abuse. By incorporating trauma-informed principles, such as opt-in 
wraparound supports and flexible attendance policies, the TI-APIP aims to engage abusive partners more effective-
ly in programming in order to achieve these goals.
The TI-APIP is centered in the belief that addressing one’s own trauma can make one more prepared and willing to 
change one’s behavior, particularly as it relates to the use of violence and perpetuation of negative gender roles. 
Performance data indicate that 78 percent of TI-APIP participants served through fall 2022 (N=144) indicated hav-
ing experienced some form of trauma (e.g., childhood exposure to DV, witnessing community violence) at the time 
of intake. By working to identify and treat trauma symptoms in addition to educating about healthy relationships, 
the TI-APIP aims to create an environment in which participants can deeply reckon with and begin to change the 
underlying beliefs and attitudes that lead to their abusive behaviors.
The TI-APIP services are free and are available to individuals charged with IPV-related crimes in Manhattan 
through mandated weekly two-hour API (Abusive Partner Intervention) groups for 26 weeks. Curriculum-based 
activities include group discussions, healing circles, weekly journal entries, worksheets and reviewing the Power 
and Control WheelE as part of programming. The TI-APIP also provides voluntary wraparound supports including 
individual counseling, case management, coaching, and referrals to other social services, as needed.
The Urban Institute is conducting a comprehensive process and outcome evaluation of TI-APIP. Primary sources of 
data include review of curricula, policies and procedures; program observations; interviews with TI-APIP and 
DANY leadership; and focus groups with and exit surveys of participants. The outcome evaluation examines differ-
ences in recidivism outcomes (e.g., subsequent arrests, dispositions/convictions, jail bookings) and likelihood of 
reoffending between the treatment group (i.e., TI-APIP participants) and individuals who were eligible for the 
program, but opted not to participate.
E     The Power and Control Wheel is a tool used in the IPV service field to help program providers and partici-
pants to identify and understand the overall patterns of abusive and violent behaviors used by an aggressor to 
maintain control over an intimate partner.

11
Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and Mental Well-Being
Similarly, the Center for Trauma Innovation 
(CTI) administers baseline surveys to newly 
enrolled participants to gather data on their 
mental health as it relates to coping skills, social 
connectedness, mindful awareness, self-compas-
sion, and somatic symptoms. CTI staff are inten-
tional in avoiding traditional assessment mea-
sures due to their potential for re-traumatization 
and misalignment with trauma-informed princi-
ples. Instead, staff allow participants to articu-
late their needs and challenges in their own 
time; by doing so, the measures are more respon-
sive to participants’ actual experiences and 
challenges. This approach granted participants 
the opportunity to reflect on their progress over 
time while also being sensitive to their individu-
al trauma experiences.
TRAUMA-RESPONSIVE 
PROGRAMMING MUST BE FLEXIBLE, 
INCLUSIVE AND COLLABORATIVE
Implementing trauma services requires more 
than the provision of counseling services; it 
necessitates mindful incorporation of trau-
ma-informed elements in all facets of program-
ming, such as involving clients in decision-mak-
ing and incorporating flexibility in service provi-
sion. For instance, THRIV, CTI and FSP 
participants had the option of engaging with 
some or all service options, granting them the 
autonomy to choose services that best fit their 
needs. Clients were actively involved in develop-
ing their own counseling goals in conjunction 
with clinicians and supportive staff. The TI-
APIP also offers optional internal and external 
supports to participants in addition to the man-
dated programming. These principles align with 
US Department of Justice guidance that provid-
ing information to survivors is a key factor in 
helping them to make their own decisions and 
reclaim power over their lives.13 
The Trauma Healing and Resilience Initiative for 
Transgender Survivors of Violence (THRIV) was 
operated by the Mount Sinai Center for Transgender 
Medicine and Surgery and the Institute for Advanced 
Medicine between 2019 and 2022. The program was 
designed to increase access to trauma-focused, gen-
der-affirming therapy for TGNB survivors of crime, 
interpersonal violence, and trauma. Services included 
individual therapy in English and Spanish; clinical 
group therapy (e.g., Seeking Safety, STAIR); a peer 
support group; a creative expression art group 
(“Creative Collective”); and educational speaker 
events. The latter included trainings for Mount Sinai 
staff on competently treating TGNB patients, such as 
how to thoughtfully conduct an intake when individ-
uals enter the emergency department. Other events 
focused on issues most pertinent to the TNGB com-
munity, such as gender dysphoria, nutrition, and 
sleep. 
Eighty-four percent of THRIV participants (N=61) 
reported being the victim of a crime; approximately 
two-thirds had experienced IPV and sexual assault. 
Just over one-quarter (28 percent) reported prior 
criminal legal involvement, and 13 percent had a 
history of homelessness.12
The Icahn School of Medicine conducted a 
mixed-methods process evaluation of THRIV. The 
study drew on both qualitative and quantitative 
methods, such as administrative data, observations of 
program meetings, interviews with THRIV staff, and 
interviews, focus groups and satisfaction surveys 
with participants.
CASE STUDY: TRAUMA HEALING AND 
RESILIENCE INITIATIVE FOR TRANSGENDER 
SURVIVORS OF VIOLENCE (THRIV)

12
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
These flexible policies, in turn, contributed to 
improved participant engagement in CJII pro-
gramming and reduction in trauma symptoms. 
TI-APIP participants were permitted to briefly 
excuse themselves if discussion topics triggered 
their trauma symptoms. Facilitators aimed to be 
forthcoming with all program information and 
honest about their goals for participants, allow-
ing them to play an active, more intentional role 
in their treatment plan. TI-APP staff shared that 
when working with a population with high rates 
of trauma, hypervigilance is a common response 
to interventions. Accordingly, staff do not rely on 
dismissal as the first tool in addressing poor 
attendance. Defined flexibility in attendance 
policies also encourages participants to balance 
accountability while also complying with court 
mandates. For instance, the program adopted 
scaled responses to lateness and absences, allow-
ing participants to “make up” up to three missed 
sessions, or provide an additional journal entry 
to reflect on the content discussed during their 
absence.
INTENTIONALLY DESIGNED SPACES 
ARE ESSENTIAL TO HEALING 
A safe space for individuals to be vulnerable and 
share their challenges is foundational to intention-
al, trauma-informed programming. The Parenting 
Journey curriculum provided FSP parents with a 
judgment-free space where they could express 
themselves within structured agendas and activi-
ties. Similarly, THRIV’s group-based services pro-
vided a setting for participants to form healthy 
relationships with other TGNB individuals, often 
for the first time. These groups included people of 
different genders at varying stages of their transi-
tioning process, which allowed them to learn from 
one another’s experiences and feel reassured in 
their own personal journeys. 
The physical space in which services are re-
ceived is an important consideration in imple-
menting trauma-responsive services. In the case 
of TI-APIP, URI’s office is a large, open space 
with comfortable furniture in the lobby. Program 
sessions are held in a room with multiple access 
points, with a large table and chairs arranged in 
a circle to foster a collaborative environment. A 
large window allows natural light to fill the 
space, which is known to be beneficial to physi-
cal and psychological health.19 Although these 
details may seem obvious or insignificant, spe-
cial attention to spatial details can contribute to 
an environment in which participants feel safe 
and prepared to address their trauma.
STAFF WHOSE EXPERIENCES AND 
IDENTITIES REFLECT PARTICIPANTS’ 
HELPS FOSTER TRUSTING 
RELATIONSHIPS AND HEALING.
A key factor in successful engagement and treat-
ment is employing staff who reflect participants’ 
unique identities and experiences. THRIV’s 
approach considered how TGNB individuals 
participate in (or, avoid) medical services and the 
various barriers to treatment that they face. 
Although THRIV staff made intentional efforts 
to provide competency and diversity trainings 
for hospital staff, at times, this was not sufficient 
enough to ensure TGNB participants felt con-
nected to their (cisgender) clinician. THRIV’s 
Program Coordinator, a white, cisgender woman, 
shared, “There definitely were folks that got 
referred to me who were like ‘actually, no of-
fense, but I want to work with a trans person of 
color.’ And I get that.” Later, the program hired a 
full-time Program Associate–in this case, a 
white, transgender man– to serve as a peer advo-
cate, provide administrative support and lead 
drop in and creative arts groups. While partici-
pants expressed appreciation for this new staff 
member, there were still gaps in representation, 
as nearly three-quarters (71 percent) of THRIV 
participants were transgender women and over 
half (62 percent) were people of color. 

13
Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and Mental Well-Being
The CTI is also intentional in employing staff whose lived experiences reflect those of the individuals they 
serve; for example, among 18 CTI staff members at the time of writing, 11 have lived experienceF in the crimi-
nal legal system, with six of those having been previously served by the CTI or other Exodus programs. 
Understanding the harmful impact of carceral settings, staff were able to curate safe spaces uniquely tailored 
to encourage participation among legal system-impacted clients who may otherwise have been reluctant to 
share personal experiences or display vulnerability. The staff’s lived experiences helped to create a trusting 
F     “Lived experience” is defined as experience leveraged by individuals to bring credibility and cultivate trust 
between individuals - such as criminal legal involvement or substance misuse. Shared experience and the trust 
it creates are an important enabler for relationship-building and service provision.
CASE STUDY: THE MEN’S EMPOWERMENT PROGRAM 
The Men’s Empowerment Program (MEP) was implemented by the Center for Justice Innovation (CJI)G between 
2018 and 2021 in East Harlem. The program provided trauma-informed, culturally competent care to young men 
of color, including individual counseling, group psychotherapy, and case management. More specifically, the 
program’s therapeutic models were rooted in a Trauma and MasculinityH as well as the Social-Emotional 
Learning Foundations (SELF) curriculumI. The MEP also offered part-time job opportunities through summer 
youth programs and events to distribute personal protective equipment in the community during the height of 
the COVID-19 pandemic. The internship component not only supported the financial needs of participants, but 
also allowed them to meaningfully engage with their community, leading to increased confidence, communica-
tion skills and self-purpose. As one participant shared, “Helping the community really helps your mindset.”
The vast majority of MEP participants (99.5 percent; N=222) self-identified as male; and more than half (57 per-
cent) were Black, one-third (30 percent) were Hispanic/Latine, and 8 percent were multiracial. Additionally, 89 
percent were under the age of twenty-five. Using the Philadelphia Urban Adverse Childhood Events (ACEs)J scale, 
MEP participants had routinely witnessed community violence, experienced bullying and emotional neglect. In 
addition, 15 percent of MEP participants indicated they were currently on parole or probation, and 11 percent 
shared they had been the victim of a crime at some point in their lives.
The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai conducted a process evaluation of the MEP. The study incorporat-
ed both quantitative and qualitative measures, including observing program meetings; conducting focus groups 
with participants; hosting interviews with MEP staff and referral agencies; analyzing program data; and admin-
istering regular participant satisfaction surveys. The evaluators also administered a number of validated scales 
to measure stress, complex trauma and adverse childhood events.
G     In 2021, the Center for Court Innovation (CCI) changed its name to the Center for Justice Innovation (CJI).
H     The Trauma and Masculinity model focuses on educating participants about gender role socialization and 
trauma through a socioecological lens emphasizing individual- and community-level impact.
I     The SELF curriculum fosters the development of social-emotional skills, resilience, self-efficacy and commu-
nication skills.
J     In 2013, the Philadelphia Urban ACEs scale was created to capture events that are tailored to the experienc-
es of urban populations from marginalized communities. It was adapted from the Adverse Childhood Events 
(ACEs) scale, which was originally developed in 1998.

14
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
One participant said:
“I feel like I have more coping tools 
now to deal with the times when I’m 
anxious or when I’m depressed…I 
have more language for what is going 
on and that makes it easier to deal 
with.” 
That said, clinical interventions are not the only 
demonstrated solutions—they should be offered 
alongside other treatment types and modalities. 
For example, one component of THRIV was the 
Creative Collective, where participants used visual 
and/or written media to express their emotions as 
an avenue not only to heal from trauma, but to 
build a sense of community. A common theme for 
each session was helping individuals envision a 
future for themselves, often for the first time. The 
Program Associate helped participants use the 
space to share their passions and skillsets. 
Participants sharing and discussing their art creat-
ed unifying moments that fostered openness, 
transparency, and healing. As one participant 
described:
“It’s interesting how we all have an 
effect on someone’s growth, whether 
directly or indirectly. And that’s pow-
erful—that’s really more powerful 
than any type of therapy, almost.”
The CTI took a similar approach to flexible clinical 
and non-clinical service options, which vary in 
frequency and format. Non-traditional approaches 
focus on healing through holistic methods in-
formed by creativity, movement, personal expres-
sion, and advocacy. Examples of these program 
components include boxing, public speaking, 
improv, and knitting. Interestingly, although the 
CTI offers twice as many clinical services as 
non-clinical, overall participant volumes are 
and secure environment, who noted that their own 
histories created a sense of camaraderie between 
themselves and participants. As shared by one CTI 
staff member:
“I think the greatest thing is that 
participants feel safe here…I think the 
participants see that we’re genuine 
and they feel safe to express 
themselves and their needs.”
The Community Navigators Program (CNP), a 
social service navigation initiative under CJII, 
provided a combination of referrals, coaching and 
accompaniments to Harlem community members. 
Process evaluation results showed that the CNP’s 
peer-based model exemplified the importance of 
authenticity and trust-building through shared 
identities and experiences between staff and 
participants. Participants felt unconstrained when 
speaking to or interacting with their navigators 
because of these shared identities, which was key 
to successful relationship-building and navigators’ 
understanding of participants’ goals and 
appropriate supports. This peer-based approach 
allowed participants to view navigators as “real 
people” instead of as an extension of a service 
provider, which put participants at ease and helped 
foster trusting relationships conducive to their 
healing journeys. 
MEANINGFUL TREATMENT INVOLVES 
MORE THAN CLINICAL THERAPY
Trauma symptoms are as unique as the person expe-
riencing them. Treatment, therefore, requires a vari-
ety of approaches to ensure holistic, comprehensive 
care. CJII evaluations have consistently shown that 
individual- or group-based clinical therapies can 
produce positive results. Parents and children en-
gaged in therapeutic services through FSP experi-
enced significant reductions in PTSD symptoms. 
Similarly, THRIV participants shared they had im-
proved coping skills, communication, grounding and 
problem-solving through clinical services. 

15
Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and Mental Well-Being
similar across the two types. Staff recognized the 
value of non-traditional mental health approaches 
as they relate to destigmatizing help-seeking. 
“I think if more people realized that 
this could be a space to just come 
and get help resolving issues, [in-
stead of] a serious punitive mental 
health program,” one staff member 
 explained, “...people would probably 
take to it a lot easier, and less con-
vincing would be needed for some 
people.”
CONSISTENT FUNDING REMAINS A 
CHALLENGE
Despite the widespread evidence that addressing 
trauma is beneficial to both individuals and the 
community as a whole, the lack of consistent fund-
ing undermines service providers’ ability to more 
comprehensively address their clients’ trauma. For 
instance, the TI-APIP offers services free-of-charge, 
and before the COVID-19 pandemic, staff offered 
12-week clinical counseling and other services to 
participants who experienced challenges accessing 
external referrals. The transition to remote services, 
increased enrollment of participants, decreased 
staff capacity, and administrative burdens prohibit-
ed URI from offering these additional services 
during the pandemic on a regular basis. Coupled 
with the eventual cessation of CJII funding, stake-
holders reported concerns about the future of the 
program and whether the no-cost structure, which 
allows the program to serve participants from all 
economic backgrounds, could continue.
THRIV staff also routinely communicated the 
program’s end date to participants, but due to 
limited availability of trans-specific clinical pro-
grams in New York City more broadly, it inevitably 
meant an interruption to care. The lack of ongoing 
funding may inadvertently force people to access 
care from providers that are ill-equipped or lack 
meaningful understanding of the challenges TGNB 
individuals face. This void in the service landscape 
in turn creates distrust of the healthcare system 
and an increase in unmet needs for a population 
that already accesses services at disproportionately 
lower rates compared to the general population.
ADDRESSING TRAUMA REQUIRES 
LONG-TERM COMMITMENT 
Many CJII programs provided clinical and 
wraparound care to survivors of trauma, but 
evaluation results demonstrate that short-term 
interventions are often not enough to sustain 
positive change in overall health and wellbeing. 
While TI-APIP participants are mandated to 
engage in services for 26 weeks, staff asserted that 
most participants are also food insecure, unstably 
housed, or dealing with other urgent needs, which 
are known contributors to trauma. Meeting 
immediate needs like access to food increases 
participant engagement in programming, but other 
supports (e.g., stable housing) may take much 
longer to attain. “For these types of programs to 
work,” shared one TI-APIP stakeholder, “it has to 
be so much more than the one and a half to two 
hours they are in the room.”
The THRIV program ended in November 2022 after 
operating for approximately three years. During 
this time, participants engaged in programming 
for an average of about one year, demonstrating the 
demand for gender-affirming care and the level of 
commitment necessary to provide comprehensive 
support to TGNB individuals. Many participants 
also expressed their interest in extended group 
sessions, and although staff were able to accommo-
date these requests, limited capacity inhibited 
their ability to do so on a regular basis.

16
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
To successfully address trauma and meaningfully 
and holistically support healing, providers must 
incorporate trauma-informed and trauma-re-
sponsive approaches into their practice. These 
approaches must be tailored to individuals’ specif-
ic circumstances and, in many cases, be provid-
ed on a longer-term basis. Based on the lessons 
learned from the CJII evaluation case studies, 
funders and policymakers should consider the 
following recommendations to support trauma 
and healing as part of their overall strategies.  
TAILOR TRAUMA-RESPONSIVE 
PROGRAMS TO THE POPULATIONS 
BEING SERVED
Trauma is a widespread phenomenon, yet mani-
fests differently in each person. Service providers 
must tailor their treatment approaches to ac-
count for the various identities, experiences, and 
unique life circumstances of the participants 
they serve. For instance, TGNB individuals expe-
rience better mental health outcomes when ser-
vices are provided in an affirming way, even if 
the providers themselves do not identify as 
TGNB.20 With regard to abusive partner interven-
tions, addressing participants’ immediate needs 
ensures they will be better suited to engage with 
programming in the long-term. On the other 
hand, while numerous providers offer care to 
survivors of gender-based violence, some only 
focus on treating the survivor as an individual 
but neglect the broader family as central to the 
survivor’s healing. Because of this, programs 
should employ treatment models that can be 
tailored to different individual needs, family 
structures, and other dynamics and 
characteristics.
USE A COMBINATION OF CLINICAL 
AND NON-CLINICAL INTERVENTIONS 
TO PROVIDE MORE HOLISTIC CARE 
Clinical interventions often incorporate tradition-
al, Western conceptualizations of healing, but a 
routinized or one-size-fits-all approach to care may 
not be responsive for many populations. The CJII 
evaluations demonstrate that other types of treat-
ments in conjunction with clinical support can 
ease symptoms of complex trauma and PTSD; 
namely, feelings of isolation, low self-esteem, and 
lack of hope for the future. Art-based groups can 
encourage participants to express themselves 
freely and connect with similar individuals, par-
ticularly if they struggle to verbalize how they are 
feeling and are reluctant to participate when they 
first enroll in treatment. Other activities such as 
family events, yoga/recreation, summer camps, 
and holiday parties are also well-received by par-
ticipants, and can serve as nontraditional yet valid, 
community-based trauma treatment strategies 
outside the clinical setting.
CREATE EMPLOYMENT PATHWAYS FOR 
PEOPLE UNDERREPRESENTED IN THE 
HELPING PROFESSIONS 
Across CJII programs, the importance of staff 
reflecting participant identities was clear, but 
several groups remain significantly underrepre-
sented in key helping professions.21 Survivors of 
trauma from various underserved groups face 
barriers to long-term employment due to stigma 
and harassment; sporadic employment histories; 
and inequitable access to educational opportuni-
ties, among others. Programs serving these popula-
tions should provide participants with intentional 
professional development and training opportuni-
ties that focus less on traditional qualifications, 
such as college degrees, from which they have been 
historically and systematically excluded. Uplifting 
and investing in participants’ credentials—and 
Recommendations

17
Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and Mental Well-Being
creating alternative pathways for them to work 
with the communities they represent—will in-
crease the pool of qualified candidates who are not 
only already familiar with the inner workings of 
the program but also reflect the identities and 
experiences of the people they aim to serve.
INCORPORATE FLEXIBLE PROGRAM 
POLICIES TO MEET PARTICIPANTS 
WHERE THEY ARE
Individuals who enroll in trauma-focused pro-
grams bring their unique experiences, and are at 
various stages in their healing journeys. Providers 
should consider the different ways in which they 
offer services and incorporate flexibility and par-
ticipant voice whenever possible; for example, 
some participants are drawn to remote engage-
ment because it eliminates the need to, or cost of, 
travel. Others may prefer in-person services to 
enhance connections with their peers. Providers 
should also consider the types of services they 
provide (i.e., individual, group), whether they can 
be formal (i.e., structured) or informal (i.e., drop-
in), at what frequency and at what times. 
Incorporating flexible policies with regard to ser-
vice offerings, engagement, and attendance can 
reach more people in need of services and aid in 
long-term retention, increasing the likelihood of 
improved mental and physical health outcomes.
DEDICATE FUNDING TO LONGER-
TERM CARE
Treating trauma requires substantial time and 
resources, and individuals and communities often 
need immediate support (e.g., to address a crisis) 
before they can meaningfully participate in long-
term services and heal from their trauma. Many 
survivors need assistance securing basic needs first 
(e.g., access to food, secure housing), which can 
take several months before they are better posi-
tioned to address their longstanding mental health 
challenges. If program funding is unsustainable, 
participants will experience disruptions to care, 
which only fosters further distrust of and barriers 
to supportive services. The allocation of long-term 
funding allows service providers to support survi-
vors throughout their healing journey, however 
long that may take.
This brief is part of ISLG’s series on lessons learned from the CJII. To view the full series of briefs, see here. 
In addition to this brief on the importance of addressing trauma as part of public safety and community 
wellbeing initiatives, this series includes briefs on:
•	
Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration for Greater Impact
•	
Understanding, Reaching & Engaging Excluded Populations
•	
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System
To access the other briefs and the evaluations funded through CJII, including those referenced in this brief, 
please see here.

18
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
1.	
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration. (2014). SAMHSA’s concept of 
trauma and guidance for a trauma-informed 
approach. HHS Publication No. (SMA) 14-4884. 
Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration. Retrieved from https://
store.samhsa.gov/product/samhsas-concept-trau-
ma-and-guidance-trauma-informed-approach/
sma14-4884. 
2.	
“How to Manage Trauma.” 2022. The National 
Council for Community Behavioral Healthcare. 
https://www.thenationalcouncil.org/wp-content/
uploads/2022/08/Trauma-infographic.pdf.
3.	
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration. 2014.
4.	
 Kilpatrick, D. G., & Acierno, R. (2003). Mental 
health needs of crime victims: Epidemiology and 
outcomes. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 16(2), 119-132. 
Zlotnick, C., Johnson, D. M., & Kohn, R. (2006). 
Intimate partner violence and long-term psychoso-
cial functioning in a national sample of American 
women. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 21(2), 
262-275 
Swanberg, J. E., & Logan, T. K. (2005). Domestic 
violence and employment: A qualitative study. 
Journal of occupational health psychology, 10(1), 
3-17.
5.	
Murray, M., Hook, M., & Seymour, A. (2005). Listen 
to my story: Communicating with victims of crime. 
United States Department of Justice: Office for 
Victims of Crime. Accessed September 18, 2023, 
from https://ovc.ojp.gov/sites/g/files/xyckuh226/
files/media/document/listen_to_my_story_vd-
guide.pdf.
6.	
“Children’s Services Practice Notes.” 2012. The N.C. 
Division of Social Services and the Family and 
Children’s Resource Program. Vol. 17, No.2. Cook, A., 
Spinazzola, P., Ford, J., Lanktree, C., Blaustein, M., 
Cloitre, M., et al. (2005). Complex trauma in 
children and adolescents. Psychiatric Annals, 35(5), 
390-398. http://www.practicenotes.org/v17n2.htm. 
7.	
Feldman, J. L., Luhur, W. E., Herman, J. L., Poteat, T., 
& Meyer, I. H. (2021). Health and health care access 
in the US transgender population health 
(TransPop) survey. Andrology. 9(6), 1707–1718. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/andr.13052. 
Millar, K., & Brooks, C. V. (2021). Double jeopardy: 
Minority stress and the influence of transgender 
identity and race/ethnicity. International Journal of 
Transgender Health. 23(1-2), 133–148. https://doi.org/
10.1080/26895269.2021.1890660. 
Robertson L, Akré E.R., Gonzales G. (2021) Mental 
Health Disparities at the Intersections of Gender 
Identity, Race, and Ethnicity. LGBT Health. 8(8):526-
535. https://doi:10.1089/lgbt.2020.0429.
8.	
Barboza, G.E., Dominguez, S., &Chace, E. (2016). 
Physical victimization, gender identity and suicide 
risk among transgender men and women. 
Preventive Medicine Reports, 4, 385-90. ISSN 
2211-3355. https://DOI.org/10.1016/j.
pmedr.2016.08.003. 
James, S.E., Herman, J.L. Rankin, S., Keisling, M., 
Mottet, L. & Anafi, M. (2016). The report of the 2015 
U.S. Transgender Survey. Washington, DC: National 
Center for Transgender Equality. Retrieved from 
https://transequality.org/sites/default/files/docs/
usts/USTS-Full-Report-Dec17.pdf. 
Kronk, C.A., Everhart, A.R., Ashley, F., Thompson, 
H.M., Schall, T.E., Goetz, T.G., Hiatt, L., Derrick, Z., 
Queen, R., Ram, A., Guthman, E.M., Danforth, O.M., 
Lett, E., Sun, S. E. D., Marshall, Z & Karnoski, R. 
(2022). Transgender data collection in the electronic 
health record: Current concepts and issues. Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association: 
JAMIA, 29(2), 271-84. Retrieved from https://doi.
org/10.1093/jamia/ocab136. 
Meyer, I.H., Russell, S.T., Hammock, P.L., Frost, 
D.M., & Wilson, B.D.M. (2021). Minority stress, 
distress, and suicide attempts in three cohorts of 
sexual minority adults: A U.S. probability sample. 
PLOS ONE, 16(3): e0246827. Retrieved from http://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0246827. 
Endnotes

19
Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and Mental Well-Being
Mizock, L., & Lewis, T.K. (2008). Trauma in trans-
gender populations: Risk, resilience and clinical 
care. Journal of Emotional Abuse, 8(3), 335-54. 
Retrieved from https://doi.
org/10.1080/10926790802262523.
9.	
Langton, Lynn, Berzofsky, Marcus, Krebs, 
Christopher, & Smiley-McDonald. Hope, August 
2012. Victimizations not reported to the police, 
2006-2010. Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice 
Statistics. Ofstehage, Andrew, A. Gandhi, J. Sholk, 
A. Radday, & C. Stanzler. September 2011. 
Empowering victims of domestic violence. Social 
Issue Report: September 2011.
10.	 Wolff, Nancy & J. Shi. 2012. Childhood and adult 
trauma experiences of incarcerated persons and 
their relationship to adult behavioral health 
problems and treatment. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 9(5), 
1908-1926.
11.	 American Psychological Association. 2008. 
“Children and Trauma.” 2008 Presidential Task 
Force on Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Trauma 
in Children and Adolescents. http://www.apa.org/
pi/families/resources/children-trauma-update.
aspx.  
Sered, Danielle. December 2014. Young men of color 
and the other side of harm: Addressing disparities 
in our response to violence.” Vera Institute of 
Justice. https://www.vera.org/publications/
young-men-of-color-and-the-other-side-of-harm-
addressing-disparities-in-our-responses-to-vio-
lence. 
12.	 Connolly, P., Rader, S., & Ham, J. (2023). Final 
evaluation report: The Transgender Healing and 
Resilience Initiative for Survivors of Violence. Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. Retrieved from 
https://cjii.org/wp-content/uploads/THRIV-Final-
Report.pdf. 
13.	 Murray, M., Hook, M., & Seymour, A. (2005). Listen 
to my story: Communicating with victims of crime. 
United States Department of Justice: Office for 
Victims of Crime. Accessed September 18, 2023, 
from https://ovc.ojp.gov/sites/g/files/xyckuh226/
files/media/document/listen_to_my_story_vd-
guide.pdf. 
14.	 The National Child Traumatic Stress Network. 
(April 25, 2019). Immediate reactions and long-term 
effects. Accessed October 2nd, 2023, from https://
www.nctsn.org/what-is-child-trauma/trau-
ma-types/intimate-partner-violence/effects#:~:tex-
t=Longpercent2Dtermpercent20effectsper-
cent2Cpercent20especiallypercent20from,per-
cent2Cpercent20depressionpercent2Cpercen-
t20anxietypercent2Cpercent20PTSD). 
15.	 Parenting Journey. 2014. Measuring Our Impact. 
Somerville, MA: Parenting Journey.  
Hooker, L., E. Toone, V. Raykar, C. Humphreys, A. 
Morris, E. Westrupp, and A. Taft. 2019. 
“Reconnecting Mothers and Children after Violence 
(RECOVER): A Feasibility Study Protocol of 
Child–Parent Psychotherapy in Australia.” BMJ 
Open 9 (5): e023653. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjop-
en-2018-023653. 
Dowd, H., and B. E. McGuire. 2011. “Psychological 
Treatment of PTSD in Children: An Evidence-Based 
Review.” Irish Journal of Psychology 32 (1–2): 25–39. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/03033910.2011.611612.
16.	 Connolly, P., Rader, S., & Ham, J. (2023). Final 
evaluation report: The Men’s Empowerment 
Program (MEP). Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai. Accessed October 5, 2023, from https://cjii.
org/wp-content/uploads/MEP-Final-Evaluation-
Report.pdf. 
17.	 Carson, E. A. (2020, October). Prisoners in 2019. 
Bureau of Justice Statistics. Retrieved from https://
bjs.ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/p19.pdf.
18.	 Quandt, K.R., & Jones, A. (2021, May 13th). Research 
roundup: Incarceration cause lasting damage to 
mental health. Prison Policy Initiative. Accessed 
October 5, 2023, from https://www.prisonpolicy.
org/blog/2021/05/13/mentalhealthimpacts/. 
19.	 Ko, E. & Glazier, E. (2022, March 25). “Being in 
natural light improves mood, increases happiness.” 
UCLA Health. Access October 10, 2023, from 
https://www.uclahealth.org/news/being-in-natu-
ral-light-improves-mood-increases-happiness#:~:-
text=Decadespercent20ofpercent20studiespercen-
t20havepercent20shown,ispercent20reflectedper-
cent20inpercent20publicpercent20opinion. 

20
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
The CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance is a good governance think-and-do tank. 
We craft the research, policies, partnerships, and infrastructures necessary to  help govern-
ment and public institutions work more effectively, efficiently and equitably.  
For more information, visit islg.cuny.edu.
20.	 Garcia, A. D. & Lopez, X. (August 2022). How 
cisgender clinicians can help prevent harm during 
encounters with transgender patients. American 
Medical Association Journal of Ethics, 24(8), 753-61. 
Accessed October 10, 2023, from https://jour-
nalofethics.ama-assn.org/article/how-cisgen-
der-clinicians-can-help-prevent-harm-during-en-
counters-transgender-patients/2022-08.
21.	 Page, C., Buche, J., Beck, A. J., Stamm, K., Lin, L., & 
Christidis, P. (2017). Understanding the diversity of 
students and faculty in health service psychology 
doctoral programs. University of Michigan School 
of Public Health: Behavioral Health Workforce 
Research Center. Accessed October 10, 2023, from 
https://www.behavioralhealthworkforce.org/
wp-content/uploads/2018/02/BHWRC-
Supplemental-APA-Diversity-Health-Service-
Psychology-Programs-Full-Report.pdf.


===== BRIEF 3: Understanding, Reaching & Engaging Excluded Populations =====

1
Understanding, Reaching & Engaging Excluded Populations
Building Safer Communities 
through the Criminal Justice 
Investment Initiative  
Understanding, 
Reaching & Engaging 
Excluded Populations
Research & Policy Brief
February 2025

2
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
AUTHORS 
Aimee McPhail
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance
Neal Palmer 
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This brief is the culmination of many important partnerships. 
The District Attorney of New York (DANY) and its staff have 
been instrumental partners in funding and guiding the 
development of Criminal Justice Investment Initiative (CJII) 
since 2015. 
We are grateful to the community organizations who received 
CJII funding and made possible the robust evaluation of their 
programs. Accordingly, we also thank the evaluators for their 
insightful and creative approaches to evaluation, largely during 
and after the hugely disruptive COVID-19 pandemic. In 
addition, we thank the research participants for sharing their 
experiences in the programs.
Finally, we are thankful for our CUNY ISLG colleagues—this 
report would have been impossible without Siobhán Carney 
and Patrick Hart for their leadership of CJII, and Carla Sinclair 
and Alisa Orlowsky for support in editing and design. 
This brief is part of CUNY ISLG’s series on lessons 
learned from the Criminal Justice Investment Initiative 
to promote community safety.  
 
For other briefs in the series, see here.

3
Understanding, Reaching & Engaging Excluded Populations
Executive Summary
Public sectors such as education, housing, transportation, healthcare, and local government have long histo-
ries of benefiting more dominant social groups while constraining opportunity for others, despite their 
ostensible purpose to create shared opportunities for all. Due to direct discrimination as well as indirect or 
unintentional barriers to accessing and accruing benefits from these institutions, systematically excluded 
populations such as Black, Indigenous, and people of color (BIPOC); LGBTQ+ individuals, people with dis-
abilities, and immigrants are broadly more likely to experience poorer life outcomes related to their health,1  
economic stability,2 vulnerability to harm, and involvement with the criminal legal system.3
Within this context, the Manhattan District Attorney’s Office (DANY) established the Criminal Justice 
Investment Initiative (CJII) after securing $250 million to invest in impactful projects that improve public 
safety and support a fairer, more efficient criminal legal system. The Institute for State & Local Governance 
at the City University of New York (CUNY ISLG) is the technical assistance consultant, and acts as grants 
manager to funded programs and their evaluations. Understanding that access to, and engagement in, ser-
vices is not universal, CJII funded numerous programs to provide services to individuals and communities 
who have been systematically excluded from opportunities and face a heightened risk of being victims and/
or interacting with the criminal legal system.
This brief draws on the evaluations of these programs to highlight larger lessons learned in connecting 
historically excluded groups with necessary support and services. 
These programs include:
•	
Graham Windham’s Support Lead Achieve Model (SLAM) provided intensive 
coaching to young people transitioning out of foster care in order to connect them to 
educational and employment supports necessary to work toward a living-wage career;  
•	
The Door’s Manhattan Academy Plus (MAP) program also connected foster youth 
transitioning to adulthood to wraparound services related to education, housing, 
career, and mental health counseling. 
•	
Barrier Free Living (BFL) created the Deaf Services Initiative to increase the 
capacity of direct service staff who are deaf and ASL-fluent within the organization’s 
non-residential and temporary shelter programs.  
•	
Sanctuary for Families developed the Career Readiness Training Program to 
provide survivors of domestic violence various job training services through various 
workshops.  
•	
The Mount Sinai Center for Transgender Medicine and Survey created Trau-
ma Healing and Resilience Initiative for Transgender Survivors of Violence 
(THRIV), which offered transgender and gender non-confirming (TGNC) individuals 
wraparound clinical and non-traditional trauma healing services. 

4
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
Key themes learned from implementation and the evaluation of these  
programs include:
•	
Barriers and needs vary across specific populations. 
•	
Individuals within excluded communities also have different strengths and needs 
thatshould be accommodated by providers.
•	
Flexibility in programming encourages participants to go at their own pace.
•	
Financial instability and lack of financial resources undermine opportunity.
•	
Providing training to systems, agencies, and personnel that work with these popula-
tions is vital.
•	
Staff who share identities and experiences with the participant population can con-
nect with them more effectively.
Based on these key findings, funders, policymakers, and practitioners should 
prioritize the following recommendations to ensure behavioral health and other 
social services effectively and meaningfully engage historically excluded groups: 
•	
Hire and onboard people with lived experience to become staff.
•	
Make programming flexible and individualized, meeting the specific needs of each 
participant.
•	
Facilitate communication and networking across service providers and other city 
agencies.

5
Understanding, Reaching & Engaging Excluded Populations
Public sectors such as education, housing, transpor-
tation, healthcare, and local government have long 
histories of benefiting more dominant social groups 
while constraining opportunity for others, despite 
their ostensible purpose to create shared opportuni-
ties for all. Certain individuals or groups are “social-
ly excluded,” or denied opportunities to meaning-
fully participate in society, whether through inten-
tional or unintentional actions and policies.
Typically, these systems disadvantage groups with 
non-dominant identities on the axes of race, ethnic-
ity, sexual orientation, gender identity, immigration 
status, and disability status. Due to direct discrimi-
nation as well as barriers to accessing and making 
use of services from public institutions, systemati-
cally excluded populations are more likely to expe-
rience poorer life outcomes related to their health,4  
economic stability,5 vulnerability to harm, and 
involvement with the criminal legal system.6
CENTERING DISCONNECTED, 
SYSTEMATICALLY EXCLUDED 
INDIVIDUALS AS A CORE STRATEGY
In 2015, the Manhattan District Attorney’s Office 
(DANY) established the Criminal Justice 
Investment Initiative (CJII) after securing $250 
million to invest in impactful projects that 
improve public safety and prompt a fairer, more 
efficient criminal legal system. The Institute for 
State & Local Governance at the City University of 
New York (CUNY ISLG) is the technical assistance 
consultant to DANY for CJII and acts as grants 
manager to funded programs and their 
evaluations. ISLG developed, implemented, and 
monitored the investment strategy for this fund, 
overseeing the grantee community, supporting 
organizational capacity building, and fostering 
meaningful partnerships across sectors, including 
government, philanthropy, and community-based 
organizations.
Understanding that access to, and engagement in, 
services is not universal, CJII funded a number of 
programs to provide services to individuals and 
communities who have been systematically exclud-
ed from opportunities and face a heightened risk of 
being victims and/or interacting with the criminal 
legal system. By intentionally engaging with popu-
lations who have traditionally had lower access to 
services, these programs aim to enhance access to 
resources and address the disadvantages these 
populations have experienced, increasing their 
ability to participate in society. Drawing on evalua-
tions of four programs funded through CJII, the 
sections below highlight larger lessons learned and 
recommendations for funders and policymakers to 
connect historically excluded groups with necessary 
support and services. 
SOCIAL DISPARITIES IN ACCESS TO 
RESOURCES AND IMPACT
Disparities in access to services and treatment in 
the healthcare system are longstanding and sub-
stantial. For instance, LGBTQIA+ people more 
frequently face discrimination, stigmatization, 
refusal of services, and even abuse in healthcare 
settings compared to their non-LGBTQIA+ coun-
terparts, which reduces their ability and willing-
ness to access healthcare services.7,8 These issues 
are even more prominent among transgender and 
gender non-conforming (TGNC) people within the 
LGBTQIA+ community. Limited provider knowl-
edge on how to work with TGNC patients or lack of 
acknowledgement of their gender identity, for 
example, can create an unwelcoming environment 
and lead to lower service utilization.9 Together, 
these experiences lead to worse health outcomes, 
such as poorer mental health and diagnoses of 
certain chronic diseases for LGBTQIA+ people.10 
LGBTQIA+ people may also be overrepresented in 
the criminal legal system,11 which can further 
decrease quality of health and access to care.12 
Introduction

6
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
In addition to disparate access and engagement 
in healthcare systems across certain popula-
tions, disparities embedded in education and 
employment institutions have similarly contrib-
uted to worse life outcomes for impacted groups. 
For instance, economically disadvantaged stu-
dents are less likely to enroll in college, espe-
cially at four-year institutions, compared to 
their wealthier peers.13 For immigrant families, 
education options are curtailed by language 
barriers, restrictions on eligibility due to citi-
zenship, and discrimination.14 Workplaces also 
deny equitable treatment despite laws to affirm 
the rights of minority groups. People with dis-
abilities, for example, are disadvantaged by 
ableist attitudes, the lack of accommodations to 
general practices, and inaccessible physical 
environments. These experiences lead people 
with a disability to have greater difficulty ob-
taining and maintaining employment.15 
Unemployment and the destabilization it creates 
can increase the risk for involvement in the 
criminal legal system.16
Similar trends are observed for BIPOC (Black, 
Indigenous, and People of Color) people across 
these institutions. For instance, in New York 
State, average per-pupil spending is $17,758 for 
BIPOC elementary and secondary school stu-
dents annually but $27,845 for white students.17 
Exclusion from opportunities in education and 
employment, as well as discriminatory law 
enforcement systems, contribute to the 
overrepresentation of BIPOC people in the crimi-
nal legal system. Black students are two to three 
times as likely to be suspended from school com-
pared to white students18 and at least two times as 
likely to be sentenced to incarceration,19 even for 
the same crimes.20 Moreover, Black people account-
ed for 33 percent and Hispanics accounted for 23 
percent of the prison population compared to 12 
percent and 16 percent of the United States popula-
tion in 2018, respectively.21 Not only does the crimi-
nal legal system disproportionately affect BIPOC 
groups, but research has shown that the system 
exacerbates issues of poverty and produces dispa-
rate reentry outcomes for BIPOC people once 
released from incarceration.22, 23
The disparate access to and engagement in what 
could be beneficial public services among system-
atically excluded groups must be acknowledged in 
the development of any public safety intervention. 
This understanding is especially important given 
the increased risk these groups have of involve-
ment in punitive systems and the accompanying 
negative life outcomes including to their own 
safety and wellbeing. 
By intentionally engaging with 
populations who have 
traditionally had lower access to 
services, these programs aim to 
enhance access to resources and 
address the disadvantages these 
populations have experienced, 
increasing their ability to 
participate in society.

7
Understanding, Reaching & Engaging Excluded Populations
As part of CJII funding, researchers conducted 
evaluations to assess implementation and impacts 
of selected programs. These evaluations highlight 
several important considerations regarding the 
implementation of programming and services for 
systematically excluded groups. Services for these 
particular populations are not one-size-fits-all; 
instead, service providers must intentionally design 
programming, including: tailoring services to the 
focus population; understanding participant barri-
ers and specific needs; being flexible with service 
engagement; helping participants navigate across 
various systems; improving financial security; 
providing relevant training to staff and connected 
networks; and hiring staff with shared identities to 
those being served. Overall, these key takeaways 
describe how CJII programs actively worked to 
include populations who otherwise would have 
been excluded from the opportunity to engage in 
and receive much needed services.
BARRIERS AND NEEDS VARY ACROSS 
EXCLUDED POPULATIONS 
Systematically excluded populations face numerous 
barriers when trying to access services. These barri-
ers must be intentionally addressed to ensure these 
communities can benefit from available support. 
THRIV recognized that TGNB individuals have 
historically experienced disproportionate exposure 
to violence and barriers in accessing mental health 
services relative to non-TGNB individuals. The 
program worked to create a safe space for the TGNB 
community by connecting participants with other 
trans community members, providing supportive 
peer relationships, and helping build healthy rela-
tionships—particularly in a medical setting. The 
program also made space for THRIV participants to 
heal from trauma, empowering them to advocate for 
themselves and learn tangible skills (e.g., communi-
cation, coping) to help process their trauma and 
respond effectively. One participant described the 
Findings & Lessons Learned
The Trauma Healing and Resilience Initiative for 
Transgender Survivors of Violence (THRIV) was 
designed to increase access to trauma-focused, 
gender-affirming therapy for TGNB survivors of 
trauma and interpersonal violence. This program, 
under the direction of the Mount Sinai Center for 
Transgender Medicine and Surgery, provides indi-
vidual therapy (in English or Spanish), structured 
group therapy (e.g., Seeking Safety, STAIR, and 
Dialectical Behavioral Therapy), and non-clinical 
groups (e.g., Creative Collective, peer support 
groups) to TGNB individuals, filling a gap in ser-
vices for a group that experiences disproportion-
ately high exposure to violence but low access to 
clinical services.25,26 As a means to engage partici-
pants of the program beyond therapy, THRIV 
offered participants the opportunity to build com-
munity through the development of a virtual 
speaker series with topics relevant to the TGNB 
community and by the participants themselves 
(i.e., meditation, Autism and Gender Dysphoria). 
THRIV also trained hospital employees on topics 
such as trauma-informed care and adequate care 
for TGNB patients, particularly in the emergency 
department.  
Icahn School of Medicine conducted a process 
evaluation of THRIV using both qualitative and 
quantitative methods. Data collection included 
remote program observations, focus group inter-
views with THRIV participants, and interviews 
with program staff and referring clinicians. The 
study also analyzed program data and collected 
participant satisfaction surveys. 
CASE STUDY: TRAUMA HEALING AND 
RESILIENCE INITIATIVE FOR 
TRANSGENDER SURVIVORS OF 
VIOLENCE (THRIV)

8
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
impact of THRIV’s program coordinator, stating:
“[She was] the first therapist [with 
whom] I felt like I could give a spe-
cific detail about a hard time that I 
was anticipating, and trust her 
with that information, so I didn’t 
have to deal with it alone, and not 
re-trigger myself while sharing that 
with her. She had set up a very 
calming space to share.”
Similarly, BFL acknowledged how being in a lin-
guistic and cultural minority creates barriers to 
not only escaping abuse but also seeking services. 
Specifically, members of the deaf community24 
may not seek victim services as a result of commu-
nication barriers, feeling as though institutions 
will automatically side with hearing perpetrators, 
and the belief that deaf individuals should be the 
ones to help other deaf individuals. Specifically, 
participants described how their unsuccessful 
attempts at prior service engagement were related 
to a lack of interpreters provided at other agencies 
or providers not knowing how to work with deaf 
individuals. BFL aimed to address these barriers by 
providing accessible and linguistically appropriate 
services for survivors of domestic violence with a 
range of disabilities, including hard of hearing 
individuals, by having ASL staff present through-
out each point of engagement in the program (and 
service landscape more broadly). 
BFL made strong efforts to have interpreters at 
Barrier Free Living (BFL) offers services to and advocates 
for survivors of domestic violence, particularly those 
with disabilities. BFL’s non-residential program, Secret 
Garden, offers survivors counseling, safety, advocacy, 
and other case management support. In addition, 
through its Freedom House program, BFL provides tem-
porary shelter for domestic violence survivors for up to 
180 days. The shelter is open to all and includes specific 
accommodations for people who may need wheelchair 
access, are deaf27 or hard of hearing, or are visually 
impaired. 
Within these overarching programs, BFL sought to 
enhance services for deaf survivors in particular. The 
Deaf Services Initiative (DSI) was created to increase the 
capacity of direct service staff who are deaf and ASL-
fluent at Secret Garden and Freedom House. Historically, 
this group experiences higher rates of victimization, yet 
has a harder time reporting crimes and receiving the 
necessary support due to a lack of accessible resources 
and services for American Sign Language (ASL) speakers. 
This expansion aimed to create more services for deaf 
survivors that were linguistically and culturally appro-
priate. The initiative also worked to ensure the efficient 
utilization of interpreters, provide hearing staff at BFL 
with relevant training (i.e., ASL, deaf culture), and make 
better use of technology in communication to empower 
deaf survivors. Externally, BFL offers criminal legal 
system professionals, service providers, and the commu-
nity at large with training on how to better serve survi-
vors of domestic violence with disabilities across New 
York City. 
The Urban Institute conducted a mixed-methods process 
evaluation of BFL’s DSI. The study primarily collected 
data through interviews with BFL staff, participants of 
the DSI, and community organization partners. Other 
data collection activities included a survey with DSI 
participants, interviews with staff and participants, 
program data, and a review of program materials.
CASE STUDY: BARRIER FREE LIVING’S 
DEAF SERVICES INITIATIVE

9
Understanding, Reaching & Engaging Excluded Populations
staff meetings, client workshops, and as a part of the interactions between hearing and non-hearing staff, as 
well as between staff and clients, to support communication. One participant shared how having a signing 
provider or facilitator helped in understanding the effects of abuse on their lives and other challenges:
“At BFL I learned what domestic violence is. I learned coping strategies, like 
how to communicate better with my children…While at Freedom House [BFL’s 
temporary residential domestic violence shelter], I got involved with the domes-
tic violence group and had one-on-one meetings with the deaf social worker. 
The domestic violence group has been great because I’m learning from other 
people’s experiences as well…I’m really garnering strength from their stories. I’m 
learning that it’s important for me to take a stand.”
Young people who have aged, or are about to age, out of foster care are at increased risk of homelessness, unem-
ployment, mental health challenges, and legal system involvement, given that they often are without perma-
nent living arrangements once they transition out of care.28, 29 Yet, they can be difficult to engage with during 
this period because the instability of foster care frequently makes the transition to adulthood even more 
fraught. Accordingly, the Foster Youth Transitioning to Adulthood (FYTA) Initiative funded two programs to 
provide services to these young people: Graham Windham’s Support Lead Achieve Model (SLAM) and The 
Door’s Manhattan Academy Plus (MAP) program. Graham SLAM offers intensive coaching to young people to 
connect them to educational and employment supports and ultimately help them build a long-term plan to-
ward living-wage careers. The Door’s MAP program offers young people connections to several services related 
to education, housing, career, and mental health counseling. Both programs offered critical support to this 
population during a transitional period: most (77 percent) of the young people enrolled at Graham Windham 
were between 16 and 19 years old, and more than half of young people enrolled at The Door were between 18 
and 25 years of age.  
Action Research evaluated Graham SLAM, The Door’s MAP program, and The Door’s Bronx Academy (BA), on 
which MAP was modeled. The evaluation included process and outcome components, with data sources includ-
ing interviews with program staff and young people in the programs, a review of quarterly reports, and admin-
istrative program data. The outcome component, in particular, draws from a first-of-its-kind comprehensive 
dataset connecting multiple New York administrative data sources including the Administration for Children’s 
Service (ACS), Human Resources Administration (HRA), Department of Homeless Services (DHS), Department 
of Corrections (DOC), and the New York State Department of Labor (DOL).  
CASE STUDY: FOSTER YOUTH TRANSITIONING TO ADULTHOOD - GRAHAM SLAM 
AND THE DOOR’S MAP PROGRAM

10
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
INDIVIDUALS WITHIN EXCLUDED 
COMMUNITIES ALSO HAVE DIFFERENT 
STRENGTHS AND NEEDS 
Given the unique experiences and needs of system-
atically excluded communities, programming 
aimed at serving these populations can better 
support participants by taking an individualized, 
needs- and strengths-based approach. Although 
Graham SLAM and The Door’s FYTA programs 
both serve foster care-involved youth, for instance, 
they serve different subpopulations within this 
group and accordingly, tailored their approaches to 
meet the distinct needs of individual participants.
For instance, Graham SLAM served more youth 
currently in foster care, younger in age, and more 
likely to report relatively stable living arrange-
ments (e.g., permanent housing, in a foster home/
with a foster family) upon enrolling into the pro-
gram. As a result, many of the educational and 
employment services focused on helping youth 
graduate high school, placement assistance for 
college, and part-time job placement to help build 
up their work experience while in school. 
n comparison, The Door served more individuals 
formerly in foster care, older in age (i.e., those 18 
and above), and more likely to report unstable 
living arrangements at enrollment, such as being 
street homeless, in an emergency shelter, or a 
residential facility. To meet these needs, The Door’s 
approach focused largely on providing housing 
case management and housing placement support, 
as well as employment support post-high school 
(e.g., work readiness and occupational training, 
internship and job placement) and basic needs (e.g., 
food, clothing).  Flexibility in Programming 
Encourages Participants to Go at their Own Pace
Incorporating a flexible program structure allows 
providers to meet participants where they are in 
their lives, and acknowledges the challenges of 
consistent participation amidst competing respon-
sibilities and priorities. The Door’s MAP program 
takes a youth-led approach in which youth decide 
for themselves which services to engage in, and 
when to begin and end service engagement. For 
instance, some youth may only need one-time assis-
tance from a MAP housing specialist, while others 
may need longer-term educational or employment 
training in addition to housing support. Having this 
open-ended service structure provides flexibility for 
the program and youth in addressing their identified 
needs. 
In the case of Graham SLAM, the program transi-
tioned from a linear phase framework for tracking 
youth’s progress in reaching their goals to, over 
time, realizing that youth may meet the criteria to 
be in one phase in one aspect of their life but anoth-
er phase in another aspect. With this in mind, 
Graham SLAM reimagined its tracking process and 
recognized that the number of contacts per week or 
month may not be the best indicator of youth’s 
progress in reaching their goals, as some youth may 
need more contact with staff as they progress fur-
ther depending on their needs. Instead, program 
staff worked with youth on an individualized basis 
to determine the appropriate number of contacts 
needed to best achieve their goals. 

11
Understanding, Reaching & Engaging Excluded Populations
approach to helping deaf survivors of domestic 
violence navigate exclusionary systems focused on 
increasing the program’s ability to communicate 
with deaf survivors, and making these systems 
more welcoming to deaf individuals. By hiring 
staff who were familiar with the deaf community 
and interpreters who knew ASL, participants of 
the program could more easily relay their experi-
ences and needs (e.g., housing, legal, financial, 
counseling) and be better connected to the appro-
priate services. 
In cases where staff were hearing and unfamiliar 
with ASL, interpreters were used to help facilitate 
conversations between the participant and staff 
member. BFL also provided ongoing training on 
Deaf culture and ASL instruction for staff led by a 
social worker from the deaf community to further 
ensure participants were provided culturally com-
petent services. A staff member shared the benefit 
to having Deaf Services more involved across both 
of BFL’s primary service sites:  
“I think having a Deaf Services team 
here has really invited us to do better 
and deeper work around communica-
tion access. We are way more inten-
tional and well versed in how we 
schedule interpreters and how we 
follow up with deaf consumers.”
Both Graham SLAM and The Door incorporated a 
mentoring/coaching model for foster youth transi-
tioning into adulthood into their programming, in 
which youth are paired with a mentor/coach that 
guides them through the creation of individualized 
goals and plans to achieve those goals. Mentoring/
coaching has the potential to aid these young folks 
by promoting resilience and experiencing positive 
life outcomes, given the lack of opportunity many 
older youth have to build these supportive rela-
tionships—especially those who lack permanent 
placements as they become adults. Staff at both 
At THRIV, during the intake process, participants 
discussed their treatment goals and worked with 
program staff to determine which types of services 
would best suit their needs. Through this process, 
THRIV participants were able to create their own 
experience by selecting to engage in the services 
they wanted. While many of the THRIV partici-
pants received individual services, some enrolled in 
the program only for group services offered (e.g., 
peer support drop-ins, expressions groups). In addi-
tion, there was no set duration of participation once 
in the program, allowing participants to terminate 
services at any point and re-engage if needed. 
Program staff highlighted this flexibility as one of 
the program’s unique features, especially since 
programming is co-located within a larger health-
care system. One staff member stated: 
“I think the ability to sort of be flexi-
ble with the services that we provid-
ed…it’s something that is not neces-
sarily done at a lot of places…
I think also being co-located with all 
of these other services makes it a very 
streamlined approach for anyone 
who wants services, but also wants to 
be connected to other types of care…”
PARTICIPANTS NEED HELP 
NAVIGATING EXCLUSIONARY SYSTEMS 
AND STRUCTURES
Ease of enrollment into available services is only 
part of the pathway to greater social inclusion and 
participation for individuals who historically have 
been excluded. Because certain groups may not 
know about these systems, programs must inten-
tionally and strategically support these individu-
als, help them navigate the systems, and receive 
the intended support; it is also critical that pro-
grams do this in a way that respects the autonomy 
and existing knowledge of participants. BFL’s 

12
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
programs emphasized the need to build youth-coach relationships from the very beginning, as a strong bond 
between the two can lead to increased engagement and success for youth in meeting their goals. The lon-
ger-term support provided by the programs was key, as staff also acknowledged that building these relation-
ships can take time. 
Youth-coach relationships became particularly important during the COVID-19 pandemic, as coaches were 
tasked with supporting youth in navigating their transition to adulthood in one of the most difficult periods 
in recent memory. In particular, staff worked to increase communication with youth, help secure housing, 
Survivors of domestic violence often experience financial hardship, as abusive partners often restrict them 
from employment and independent economic opportunities. As a result, survivors often struggle to acquire the 
necessary means to support their children and themselves.30 Survivors who are able to leave abusive relation-
ships may find themselves without the education, experience, and skills needed to succeed in the workforce 
and obtain a living-wage career.31 
The Career Readiness Training Program (CRTP), housed within Sanctuary for Families, offers survivors of 
domestic violence various job training services through a Career Readiness Workshop and Office Operations 
Workshop. The Career Readiness Workshop is a three-week course aimed at helping participants begin or 
advance their career and secure a living wage. The Office Operations Workshop, lasting 13 weeks, is an inten-
sive curriculum that aims to strengthen office skills, reading and writing, communication, and employment 
strategies. Internships, job placements, and additional support (i.e., mental health, peer support, referrals) are 
also available to participants. SFF expanded CRTP services to a new location through CJII funding in order to 
provide access to more survivors. The average CRTP participant self-identified as a woman of color, in her 
thirties, and unemployed at the time of their enrollment.  
The Urban Institute, in partnership with John Jay College of Criminal Justice, conducted a process and out-
come evaluation to assess how SFF implemented CRTP and the program’s impact on clients. Data collection 
involved observing CRTP cohort’s within multiple workshop sessions, interviews with program stakeholders 
(i.e., leadership, staff, facilitators, and partners agencies), client focus groups, programmatic data analysis, 
longitudinal client surveys, and interviews with survivors of domestic violence who had received SFF service 
but did not engage in CRTP (as a way to compare experiences with clients of CRTP). The evaluation found that 
the proportion of clients who were employed full- or part-time increased from 18 percent to 42 percent by one 
year after completion. These outcomes are especially notable given the evaluation was conducted during the 
height of COVID-19, when obtaining employment was particularly challenging for people of all backgrounds.
CASE STUDY: SANCTUARY FOR FAMILIES’ CAREER READINESS TRAINING PROGRAM

13
Understanding, Reaching & Engaging Excluded Populations
providing opportunities to engage in mock inter-
views and internships in preparation for the work-
force—all of which can have a positive impact on 
their financial independence. 
PROVIDING TRAINING TO SYSTEMS, 
AGENCIES, AND PERSONNEL THAT 
WORK WITH THESE POPULATIONS  
IS VITAL
The experiences of excluded populations are 
unique and multifaceted. Program staff need to 
understand their experiences—as do the other 
systems and agencies participants interact with 
along the way. CJII evaluations have indicated that 
programs and their networks who receive training 
and education on the populations they serve are 
better poised to provide appropriate services. 
THRIV staff conducted training with nearly 400 
hospital employees on topics such as transgender 
mental health, trauma-informed care, and provid-
ing adequate care to transgender patients. 
Many of those who attended did not have previous 
training on how to work with TGNC individuals 
and found the training provided by THRIV helpful, 
with some even reaching out for further training. 
One physician who attended said of the training: 
 “This was the best talk I’ve ever  
attended and should be mandatory  
for all medical staff.”
FYTA staff at both Graham SLAM and The Door 
indicated the need for additional training to under-
stand the context of foster care and to sharpen 
youth engagement strategies. Although staff took 
care to listen to youth’s needs and received training 
on subjects such as crisis management and suicidal-
ity, they still desired training related to navigating 
mental illness and self-care. Staff from each pro-
gram mentioned the prevalence of trauma among 
the youth they work with and how mental health 
challenges often stemmed from early adversities 
and stressors in foster care. 
offer remote services, and create new services for 
youth to earn funds to alleviate the stress of 
unemployment. 
FINANCIAL INSTABILITY AND LACK OF 
FINANCIAL RESOURCES UNDERMINE 
OPPORTUNITY
Systematically excluded populations often have a 
harder time gaining employment and may lack the 
financial security to access much-needed services, 
such as medical care or stable housing. CRTP under-
stood the importance of economic empowerment in 
survivors’ recovery from domestic violence and 
maintaining their well-being. The program helped 
survivors address several barriers to short- and 
long-term economic security, with clients showing 
improvement in literacy and skills in reading, math, 
and language; use of office technology (e.g., Microsoft 
Office); professional development skills; career readi-
ness and confidence in career outlook; and overall 
self-esteem. 
After completion of the program, many clients were 
able to obtain and maintain either part-time or 
full-time employment. Demonstrating the wide-
spread need for this support and the corresponding 
lack of capacity for it, those who did not participate 
in the program, but who engaged in other Sanctuary 
for Families programs, requested support to pursue a 
greater range of career paths, training, and intern-
ship opportunities. They also recommended that age 
and previous workforce history be considered in the 
creation of opportunities for workforce engagement. 
Within Graham SLAM and The Door’s FYTA initia-
tive, a key aspect of preparing youth to transition to 
adulthood focused on guiding them towards a living 
wage career. These youth face significant challenges 
upon aging out of the foster care system, including an 
increased risk for unemployment and poverty. 
Graham SLAM and The Door provided youth with 
supportive services focused explicitly on improving 
financial literacy, supporting students applying for 
financial aid and scholarships for college, and 

14
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
However, these staff did not feel as though they 
had the expertise to confidently handle the more 
serious mental health challenges and trauma of 
youth without the support of training and special-
ized mental health professionals. Program goals 
can be undermined if youth’s mental health issues 
go unmanaged, highlighting the importance of 
knowledge of mental health support services in 
FYTA programming. One staff member from 
Graham SLAM specifically stated: 
“We can definitely listen to our kids 
and support them. But we’re not 
equipped with the things that they 
are dealing with that require mental 
health stability.”
STAFF WHO SHARE IDENTITIES AND 
EXPERIENCES WITH THE PARTICIPANT 
POPULATION CAN CONNECT WITH 
THEM MORE EFFECTIVELY
Successful participant engagement in programs is 
facilitated by having staff who are part of the 
communities they serve. BFL’s, for instance, made 
an effort to hire deaf staff, which helped increase 
information sharing and transparency between 
deaf and hearing staff. One of the staff hired is a 
social worker from the deaf community, who also 
assisted in leading trainings on deaf culture and 
communication for all of BFL. However, challenges 
with turnover among deaf staff and issues finding 
qualified deaf staff led to a gap in services and 
higher caseloads for the staff that remained, indi-
cating that organizations must also be intentional 
in welcoming and supporting staff of underrepre-
sented backgrounds. 
THRIV thought critically about TGNB engagement 
in services and the barriers to care the community 
experience. One of these barriers was a lack of 
representation among program staff. Upon enter-
ing the program, THRIV participants frequently 
reported their preference to work with a TGNB 
clinician. Yet, for the first year of the program, no 
program staff identified as TGNB. In response, 
THRIV worked to enhance the competence of 
current staff through diversity training and creat-
ed a full-time Program Associate position who 
identified with the trans community. Despite these 
efforts and participant appreciation of them, they 
further noted that the Program Associate identi-
fied as a trans man while more than 70 percent of 
participants identified as trans women. 
Additionally, while two-thirds of participants 
identified as BIPOC, both the Program Associate 
and Coordinator were white. The lack of staff with 
shared identities mirrors the greater underrepre-
sentation of TGNB clinicians in the healthcare 
professions more broadly.32

15
Understanding, Reaching & Engaging Excluded Populations
To successfully serve systematically excluded 
individuals, programs must fully understand the 
populations they intend to serve, and design cul-
turally sensitive services with their specific experi-
ences in mind. Doing so creates more opportunity 
for these groups to receive necessary services, and 
fosters trust that the services themselves are in-
tentional in addressing their unique needs. Based 
on the lessons learned from the CJII evaluation 
case studies, funders and policymakers should 
consider the following recommendations to fill in 
gaps in access and availability of services for sys-
tematically excluded groups.  
HIRE AND ONBOARD PEOPLE WITH 
LIVED EXPERIENCE TO BECOME STAFF
While it is important to have program staff who 
are educated on and experienced with the specific 
populations being served, having the services 
provided by someone with similar lived experience 
and shared identities provides an added layer of 
trust. Staff who have shared life experience can 
better understand the nuances and complexities of 
participants’ lives, which in turn informs how best 
to connect them to services and help them navi-
gate the various systems they will interact with 
throughout their time in the program and beyond. 
Programs should create opportunities for partici-
pants to work towards becoming staff themselves, 
guiding other participants given their experiences 
and providing representation that helps build trust 
amongst excluded populations. At the same time, 
this approach benefits from a broader look at the 
exclusionary mechanisms that have contributed to 
underrepresentation of lived experience and 
shared identities among program staff, including 
education barriers and inadequate compensation. 
Addressing these constraints will create even more 
opportunities to diversify program staff. In addi-
tion, recruitment and hiring of staff should target 
the same communities as the people they serve.
MAKE PROGRAMMING FLEXIBLE  
AND INDIVIDUALIZED, MEETING  
THE SPECIFIC NEEDS OF EACH 
PARTICIPANT
Systematically excluded populations face a number 
of challenges to accessing necessary services and 
care, while simultaneously balancing a wide range 
of needs. Rather than having a standard model to 
reach their goals, programs should incorporate 
flexible programming and individualized plans of 
action that meet the participant where they are at 
the time of enrollment and adjust as they progress 
through the program. This approach is the most 
effective way to help participants meet their goals, 
as each participants’ set of needs are different and 
should inform how staff work with participants to 
identify priorities. Furthermore, allow participants 
to have a voice in all aspects of engagement, includ-
ing which services to receive and how frequently to 
receive them. This will help create a more welcom-
ing space and foster a sense of belonging as partici-
pants are given opportunities to express themselves 
in a way that works best for them.
FACILITATE COMMUNICATION 
AND NETWORKING ACROSS SERVICE 
PROVIDERS AND OTHER CITY 
AGENCIES 
Given the complex range of needs excluded popula-
tions experience, programs are typically only able 
to address a portion of a person’s needs and must 
refer individuals out to other service providers 
better suited to address other needs. In order to do 
so effectively, programs must build and communi-
cate with the networks a participant is likely to 
come into contact with—through training or work-
shops—in order to share knowledge and create 
resources to better serve this population. This 
becomes particularly important as most, if not all, 
participants will have experienced some degree of 
exclusion from these systems in the past. 
Recommendations

16
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
This brief is part of ISLG’s series on lessons learned from the CJII. To view the full series of briefs, see here.
In addition to this brief on the importance of addressing trauma as part of public safety and community 
wellbeing initiatives, this series includes briefs on:
•	
Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration for Greater Impact
•	
Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and Mental Well-Being
•	
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System
To access the other briefs and the evaluations funded through CJII, including those referenced in this brief, 
please see here.

17
Understanding, Reaching & Engaging Excluded Populations
1.	
Garcia, J., & Crosby, R. A. (2020). Social determi-
nants of discrimination and access to health care 
among transgender women in Oregon. 
Transgender Health, 5(4), 225-233.
2.	
Batavia, A. I., & Beaulaurier, R. L. (2001). The 
financial vulnerability of people with disabilities: 
Assessing poverty risks. J. Soc. & Soc. Welfare, 28, 
139.
3.	
Boen, C. E., Graetz, N., Olson, H., Ansari-Thomas, 
Z., Bixby, L., Schut, R. A., & Lee, H. (2022). Early 
life patterns of criminal legal system involve-
ment: Inequalities by race/ethnicity, gender, and 
parental education. Demographic research, 46, 131.
4.	
Garcia, J., & Crosby, R. A. (2020).
5.	
Batavia, A. I., & Beaulaurier, R. L. (2001).
6.	
Boen, C. E., Graetz, N., Olson, H., Ansari-Thomas, 
Z., Bixby, L., Schut, R. A., & Lee, H. (2022).
7.	
Tabaac, A. R., Solazzo, A. L., Gordon, A. R., Austin, 
S. B., Guss, C., & Charlton, B. M. (2020). Sexual 
orientation-related disparities in healthcare 
access in three cohorts of US adults. Preventive 
medicine, 132, 105999.
8.	
Ayhan, C. H. B., Bilgin, H., Uluman, O. T., Sukut, 
O., Yilmaz, S., & Buzlu, S. (2020). A systematic 
review of the discrimination against sexual and 
gender minority in health care settings. 
International Journal of Health Services, 50(1), 
44-61.
9.	
Teti, M., Kerr, S., Bauerband, L. A., Koegler, E., & 
Graves, R. (2021). A qualitative scoping review of 
transgender and gender non-conforming people’s 
physical healthcare experiences and needs. 
Frontiers in Public Health, 9, 598455.
10.	 Medina-Martínez, J., Saus-Ortega, C., Sánchez-
Lorente, M. M., Sosa-Palanca, E. M., García-
Martínez, P., & Mármol-López, M. I. (2021). 
Health inequities in LGBT people and nursing 
interventions to reduce them: A systematic 
review. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 18(22), 11801.
11.	 Irvine, A., & Canfield, A. (2015). The 
overrepresentation of lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
questioning, gender nonconforming and trans-
gender youth within the child welfare to juvenile 
justice crossover population. Am. UJ Gender Soc. 
Pol’y & L., 24, 243.
12.	 Baćak, V., Thurman, K., Eyer, K., Qureshi, R., Bird, 
J. D., Rivera, L. M., & Kim, S. A. (2018). 
Incarceration as a health determinant for sexual 
orientation and gender minority persons. 
American journal of public health, 108(8), 994-999.
13.	 Reber, S., & Smith, E. (2023). College enrollment 
disparities: Understanding the role of academic 
preparation. Center on Children and Families at 
Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/wp-con-
tent/uploads/2023/02/20230123_CCF_
CollegeEnrollment_FINAL2.pdf
14.	 Baum, S., & Flores, S. M. (2011). Higher education 
and children in immigrant families. The future of 
children, 171-193.
15.	 Lindsay, S., Fuentes, K., Tomas, V., & Hsu, S. 
(2023). Ableism and workplace discrimination 
among youth and young adults with disabilities: 
A systematic review. Journal of Occupational 
Rehabilitation, 33(1), 20–36.
16.	 Thornberry, T. P., & Christenson, R. L. (1984). 
Unemployment and criminal involvement: An 
investigation of reciprocal causal structures. 
American Sociological Review, 398-411. 
Siwach, G. (2018). Unemployment shocks for 
individuals on the margin: Exploring recidivism 
effects. Labour Economics, 52, 231-244.
17.	 New York Advisory Committee to the U.S. 
Commission on Civil Rights (2020). Education 
Equity in New York: A Forgotten Dream. https://
www.usccr.gov/files/pubs/2020/02-10-Education-
Equity-in-New-York.pdf.
18.	 Wallace Jr, J. M., Goodkind, S., Wallace, C. M., & 
Bachman, J. G. (2008). Racial, ethnic, and gender 
differences in school discipline among US high 
school students: 1991-2005. The Negro educational 
review, 59(1-2), 47.
Endnotes

18
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
19.	 “Updated data and charts: Incarceration stats by 
race, ethnicity, and gender for all 50 states and 
D.C.”, (Prison Policy Initiative, 2023), https://
www.prisonpolicy.org/blog/2023/09/27/updat-
ed_race_data/.
20.	 Kamalu, N. C., Coulson-Clark, M., & Kamalu, N. 
M. (2010). Racial disparities in sentencing: 
Implications for the criminal justice system and 
the African American community. African Journal 
of Criminology and Justice Studies, 4(1), 2.
21.	 Gramlich, J. (2020). Black imprisonment rate in 
the US has fallen by a third since 2006.
22.	 Stamm, M. (2016). Between a rock and discrimi-
natory place: How sentencing guidelines and 
mandatory minimums should be employed to 
reduce poverty discrimination in the criminal 
justice system. Geo. J. on Poverty L. & Pol’y, 24, 
399.
23.	 Hoskins, K. M. (2019). Race and re-entry after 
incarceration. In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of 
Criminology and Criminal Justice.
24.	 People who self-identify as part of the deaf 
community share common and distinct languag-
es, common values, and social norms. The deaf 
community, generally, extends beyond people 
who identify as deaf or hard-of hearing to 
include hearing people engaged with the cause, 
ASL interpreters and translators, children of deaf 
adults (CODAs), and other relatives and friends.
25.	 Domínguez-Martínez, T., Rebeca, R. G., Fresán, 
A., Cruz, J., Vega, H., & Reed, G. M. (2023). Risk 
factors for violence in transgender people: A 
retrospective study of experiences during 
adolescence. Psychology & Sexuality, 14(4), 659-675.
26.	 Pandya, A. K., & Redcay, A. (2021). Access to 
health services: Barriers faced by the transgender 
population in India. Journal of Gay & Lesbian 
Mental Health, 25(2), 132-154.
27.	 The term deaf refers to a range of types of 
medical hearing loss resulting in a person being 
unable to understand speech using sound alone, 
while Deaf (with a capital D) describes someone 
who identifies as culturally Deaf meaning they 
use ASL as a primary language. Except when 
referring specifically to Deaf culture, for purpos-
es of inclusivity and simplicity, we use “deaf” in 
this brief to refer to people who are Deaf, deaf, 
hard-of-hearing, late-deafened, or Deaf-Blind. 
28.	 Courtney, M. E., & Dworsky A. (2006). Early 
outcomes for young adults transitioning from 
out-of-home care in the USA. Child & Family 
Social Work, 11(3), 209–219.
29.	 Rosenberg, R., & Kim, Y. (2018). Aging out of foster 
care: Homelessness, post-secondary education, 
and employment. Journal of public child welfare, 
12(1), 99-115.
30.	 Adams, A. E. (2011). Measuring the effects of 
domestic violence on women’s financial well-being. 
Center for Financial Security, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison. Issue Brief, 5, 1-6.
31.	  Ibid. 
32.	 Dimant, O. E., Cook, T. E., Greene, R. E., & Radix, 
A. E. (2019). Experiences of transgender and 
gender nonbinary medical students and physi-
cians. Transgender Health, 4(1), 209-216.
The CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance is a good governance think-and-do tank. 
We craft the research, policies, partnerships, and infrastructures necessary to  
help government and public institutions work more effectively, efficiently and equitably.  
For more information, visit islg.cuny.edu.


===== BRIEF 4: Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System =====

1
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System 
Building Safer Communities through 
the Criminal Justice Investment 
Initiative  
Meeting Needs and 
Creating Opportunities 
for Individuals Involved in 
the Criminal Legal System 
Research & Policy Brief
February 2025

2
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
AUTHORS 
Aimee McPhail
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance
Neal Palmer 
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This brief is the culmination of many important partnerships. The 
District Attorney of New York (DANY) and its staff have been 
instrumental partners in funding and guiding the development of 
Criminal Justice Investment Initiative (CJII) since 2015. 
We are grateful to the community organizations who received CJII 
funding and made possible the robust evaluation of their programs. 
Accordingly, we also thank the evaluators for their insightful and 
creative approaches to evaluation, largely during and after the hugely 
disruptive COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, we thank the research 
participants for sharing their experiences in the programs.
Finally, we are thankful for our CUNY ISLG colleagues—this report 
would have been impossible without Siobhán Carney and Patrick Hart 
for their leadership of CJII, and Carla Sinclair and Alisa Orlowsky for 
support in editing and design. 
This brief is part of CUNY ISLG’s series on lessons 
learned from the Criminal Justice Investment Initiative 
to promote community safety.  
 
For other briefs in the series, see here.

3
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System 
Executive Summary
With one of the highest incarceration rates in the world, the United States routinely responds to crime with jail 
and prison.1 However, rather than deterring crime, this response can contribute to increased risk of further 
criminal legal system involvement.2, 3  Removing individuals from their communities negatively impacts their 
relationships, career trajectories, and community ties, weakening their ability to reenter and positively contrib-
ute to society. Following periods of detention and incarceration, many of these individuals face social isolation, 
difficulty accessing critical services (e.g., health and mental health, employment and education opportunities), 
and stigma—all of which can increase the likelihood of further involvement in the criminal legal system.4, 5  
Within this context, the Manhattan District Attorney’s Office (DANY) established the Criminal Justice 
Investment Initiative (CJII) after securing $250 million to invest in improving public safety and supporting a 
fairer, more efficient criminal legal system. The Institute for State & Local Governance at the City University of 
New York (CUNY ISLG) is the technical assistance consultant and acts as grants manager to funded programs 
and their evaluations. To address the intersecting and wide-ranging needs of individuals at risk of detention, or 
who are returning from jail and prisons, CJII funded several programs to provide services to support successful 
reentry and reintegration and reduce further contact with the criminal legal system.  
This brief draws on the evaluations of these programs to highlight larger lessons learned in connecting indi-
viduals with criminal legal system involvement with necessary support and services to promote opportunity 
and successful reintegration. 
These programs include:
•	
Project Reset offered post-arrest, pre-ar-
raignment diversion programming for 
individuals arrested for low-level, nonviolent 
offenses through three community provid-
ers: the Center for Court Innovation, the 
Osborn Association, and Young New Yorkers. 
•	
The NYC Department of Health and 
Mental Hygiene developed New York 
City’s Health Justice Network (NYC HJN) to 
support individuals’ well-being and address 
their health needs following release from 
incarceration, thereby reducing their like-
lihood of becoming reinvolved with the 
criminal legal system.   
•	
The College in Prison Reentry Initiative 
expanded access to college for individuals in 
New York State prison facilities with a focus 
on establishing and aligning state-wide 
program and curriculum standards as well 
as strengthening reentry support.  
•	
The Urban Resource Institute implement-
ed the Trauma-Informed Abusive Partner 
Intervention Program (TI-APIP), consisting 
primarily of individual-and group-based 
clinical services, for abusive partners.  
•	
The Osborne Association and the Taysha-
na Chicken Murphy Foundation created 
the West Harlem Community Reentry & 
Restoration Project (WHCRRP), a neigh-
borhood-based program offering reentry 
services to individuals in the Manhattanville 
and Grant Houses and surrounding area who 
were affected by a 2014 law enforcement 
intervention.  
•	
College and Community Fellowship’s 
Build of Student Services (BOSS) support-
ed legal system-involved women through 
community engagement, access to higher ed-
ucation, and addressing academic and career 
opportunity barriers.

4
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
Key themes learned from implementation and the evaluation of these  
programs include:
•	
Informed Program and Staff Approaches are Key to Trust and Healing. 
•	 Non-punitive, restorative approaches support well-being.   
•	 Training for staff on trauma and its effects enhances staff practices and participant 
experiences. 
•	 Shared lived experience is important for building trust with participants. 
•	 Reaching individuals most impacted by the criminal legal system requires focus and 
intentionality. 
•	 Flexibility in programming allows for various pathways for participant engagement.  
•	
Criminal Behavior is a Large, Complex Social Phenomenon that Requires Addressing 
Material Needs including:    
•	 Employment and financial support 
•	 Education 
•	 Health and mental health  
•	 Other material needs and support 
Based on these key findings, funders, policymakers, and practitioners should 
prioritize the following recommendations to ensure behavioral health and other 
social services effectively and meaningfully support individuals with criminal 
legal involvement: 
•	
Foster continuous and comprehensive care.  
•	
Comprehensive staff training and experience aids their work with individuals involved with 
the criminal legal system. 
•	
Address material needs as part of programming to aid participant success. 
•	
Allow for flexibility and multiple points of engagement and re-engagement in programming. 
•	
Increase community awareness of programs, invest in provider responsiveness, and highlight 
benefits to improve recruitment and attendance. 
•	
Monitor and address inequities in program engagement and completion. 
•	
Deploy data-driven approaches to assess impact.   

5
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System 
The United States has one of the highest incarcera-
tion rates in the world, with nearly 2 million peo-
ple incarcerated nationwide.6 Yet, rather than 
deterring crime, incarceration often increases the 
risk of additional criminal legal system involve-
ment.7, 8 The removal of individuals from their 
communities erodes their relationships, career 
trajectories, and community ties—weakening their 
ability to reintegrate and meaningfully contribute 
to society after release. 
Reentry from incarceration is a critical yet fraught 
period; without the appropriate support, many 
struggle to draw on the necessary resources, pro-
grams, and opportunities to resume their lives. As 
a result, these individuals can encounter social 
isolation, difficulty accessing critical services (e.g., 
health and mental health, employment, education), 
and stigma—all of which can increase the likeli-
hood of further involvement in the criminal legal 
system.9, 10 These patterns reveal the critical need 
for more effective diversion and rehabilitative 
approaches that address the gamut of needs some-
one may face during reentry; these can include any 
combination of education, job training, mental 
health care, housing assistance, and more, as these 
supports can contribute to overall wellbeing and 
curtail the risk of reoffending.
INCREASING SUPPORTS TO HELP 
PEOPLE AVOID DETENTION AND 
REINCARCERATION  
In 2015, the Manhattan District Attorney’s Office 
(DANY) established the Criminal Justice 
Investment Initiative (CJII) after securing $250 
million to invest in impactful projects that 
improve public safety and prompt a fairer, more 
efficient criminal legal system. The Institute for 
State & Local Governance at the City University of 
New York (CUNY ISLG) is the technical assistance 
consultant to DANY for CJII and acts as grants 
manager to funded programs and their 
evaluations. ISLG developed, implemented, and 
monitored the investment strategy for this fund, 
overseeing the grantee community, supporting 
organizational capacity building, and fostering 
meaningful partnerships across sectors, including 
government, philanthropy, and community-based 
organizations.
To address the multiple and wide-ranging needs of 
individuals returning from jail and prisons, or who 
are at risk of detention, CJII funded several 
programs to provide services tailored to support 
individuals reintegrating into the community, 
connecting them with opportunities and reducing 
further contact with the criminal legal system. 
Drawing on evaluations of six programs funded 
through CJII, the following sections highlight 
larger lessons learned and recommendations for 
funders and policymakers to improve public safety 
and individual wellbeing. 
EFFORTS TO AVOID FURTHER 
CRIMINAL LEGAL SYSTEM 
INVOLVEMENT 
The effects of criminal legal system involvement are 
well-documented. Communities of color, LGBTQ+ 
individuals, and people with a history of mental 
illness or trauma are disproportionately affected. As 
many as one in three Americans have some type of 
criminal legal system involvement. Any type of 
recorded involvement—whether an arrest with no 
conviction, a misdemeanor, or a sentence involving 
incarceration—can lead to wide-ranging and lifelong 
collateral consequences that stand in the way of 
opportunity and reintegration.11, 12   
While the legal and financial impacts of incarcera-
tion are more widely known, health-related compli-
cations are also common. Individuals involved with 
the legal system are more likely to have chronic 
Introduction

6
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
health conditions in need of ongoing management 
(e.g., diabetes, hypertension, certain neurological 
disorders) compared to those with no legal system 
involvement.13, 14 The Bureau of Justice Statistics 
has also found that individuals who have been 
incarcerated face a higher burden of disease than 
the general population.15 These patterns have 
implications for reentry and avoidance of further 
criminal legal involvement, as struggles to access 
health care and maintain good health also under-
mine stable employment, housing, and related 
core needs.16, 17 
Relatedly, people with mental health disorders are 
overrepresented in both jails and prisons. This 
population is nearly 10 times more likely to be 
incarcerated than hospitalized, which interferes 
with their ability to receive the necessary care.18 
Incarceration also takes a toll on the mental 
health of individuals both while incarcerated and 
long after release. Mental health disorders are 
more prevalent among individuals who have been 
incarcerated than similar individuals who have 
stayed in the community.19 More recent research 
suggests that individuals with a history of crimi-
nal legal system involvement are more likely to 
experience depression, mood disorders, and over-
all dissatisfaction with life.20, 21  
Education- and employment-related services are 
another critical need among individuals with 
criminal legal system involvement. Compared to 
the general population, such individuals have 
lower levels of educational attainment; about 
one-third of incarcerated individuals have less 
than a high school diploma or equivalent, com-
pared to 14 percent of the general population.22 
Additionally, those incarcerated are less likely to 
have a history of steady employment or vocational 
skills and face difficulty finding employment after 
release.23 Those who do secure employment after 
release earn far less than the general public. 
Given the challenges and stigma associated with 
criminal legal system involvement, diversion and 
reentry programs provide an opportunity to redirect 
individuals away from and out of the criminal legal 
system and toward community-based responses that 
can more effectively address risk factors and needs. 
By focusing on rehabilitation and meeting core needs 
rather than enforcing punishment, these approaches 
target issues like poverty, housing instability, and 
mental health. Whether serving individuals at risk of 
incarceration or those already incarcerated, diversion 
and reentry programs aim to reduce future legal 
system contact and support prosocial behaviors. 
With as much as 40 percent of the people incarcerat-
ed in state and federal prison considered non-violent 
and/or facing low-level charges24, these approaches 
can help reframe the role of the criminal legal system 
and create opportunities for the individuals 
involved.25 

7
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System 
As part of CJII funding, independent researchers 
conducted evaluations to assess the implementa-
tion and impacts of selected programs. These 
evaluations highlight several important consider-
ations regarding the needs of and approaches to 
serving those currently incarcerated, returning to 
the community after a period of incarceration, or 
at risk for further involvement in the criminal 
legal system. Services for these groups require 
non-punitive, restorative approaches; specific 
training for staff rooted in trauma and under-
standing of these populations; shared experience 
and trust among staff and participants; intention-
ality to ensure equitable access and address barri-
ers to engagement; and fulfilling underlying needs. 
Overall, these key takeaways describe how CJII 
programs provided promising, humane approaches 
for equipping individuals, families, organizations, 
and communities with the opportunities and 
resources necessary to avoid future criminal legal 
system involvement. 
INFORMED PROGRAM AND STAFF 
APPROACHES ARE KEY TO TRUST AND 
HEALING 
Non-Punitive, Restorative Approaches Support 
Well-Being  
Non-punitive, rehabilitative approaches seek to 
provide individuals involved with the criminal 
legal system the necessary skills and support to 
foster long-term positive change and personal 
growth. These approaches aim to foster account-
ability and understanding of behavior through 
positive, constructive means rather than draconi-
an penalties. Project Reset providers included 
rehabilitative components tailored to the individu-
al populations they serve. Center for Court 
Innovation (CCI)’s curriculum was based on the 
principles of procedural justice and restorative 
justice, giving participants the opportunity to talk 
Findings & Lessons Learned
The Project Reset initiative funded three program 
providers to implement post-arrest, pre-arraign-
ment diversion programs to divert individuals 
arrested for low-level, nonviolent offenses with no 
prior criminal record. Programs were based out of 
the Center for Court Innovation (CCI), Young New 
Yorkers (YNY), and the Osborne Association. 
Eligible individuals could complete communi-
ty-based programs rather than go through tradi-
tional court processing. Upon successful comple-
tion, their arrest records were sealed. Program 
activities consisted of a one-time, two-to-three 
hour engagement such as a reflective arts-based 
workshop, social resilience workshop, restorative 
justice workshop, Narcan training, or community 
service event.  
The RAND Corporation (RAND) conducted an 
implementation assessment, quasi-experimental 
outcome evaluation, and cost analysis to deter-
mine how Project Reset was implemented; whether 
the model was effective in reducing risk factors for 
criminal legal system involvement (i.e., recidi-
vism); and whether Project Reset was cost-effec-
tive. Findings from the evaluation suggest that 
participation in the diversion opportunity did not 
lead to an increased risk of rearrest, while simulta-
neously improving perceptions of the legal system 
among participants. 
CASE STUDY: PROJECT RESET

8
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
about how their case fit into the larger criminal 
legal system, the experiences that led to their 
arrest, and their own feelings surrounding the 
event. Osborne Association and Young New 
Yorkers (YNY) also offered rehabilitative work-
shops, with Osborne focused on non-violent con-
flict resolution strategies and YNY using arts-based 
programming that encouraged participants to 
reflect on their decisions and evaluate the choices 
that led to their arrest. 
Similarly, the West Harlem Community 
Restoration and Reentry Project (WHCRRP) incor-
porated a restorative framework built around 
healing and restoration. Through this framework, 
the program focused on supporting needs identi-
fied by community members and building bridges 
between people on different sides of community 
conflict, as well as between the community and 
law enforcement. WHCRRP held community 
events and workshops (e.g., basketball tourna-
ments, OSHA trainings, Safe Streets) which resi-
dents of both Manhattanville and Grant Houses, 
the NYPD, and other community partners could 
attend. The goal of these community and recre-
ational activities was to bring together people and 
communities who historically have experienced 
tensions with one another as a way of supporting 
the wellbeing of every member of the community.  
In addition, the Trauma-Informed Abusive Partner 
Intervention Program (TI-APIP)’s curriculum 
focuses on community healing and individual 
development, while simultaneously acknowledging 
the sense of marginalization that many partici-
pants may be experiencing. The program regularly 
engages participants in healing circles; for in-
stance, facilitators held discussions on topics 
related to stressors in participants’ lives, building 
male emotional support networks, and showing 
empathy for romantic partners. Facilitators create 
a space in which participants can feel comfortable 
expressing their thoughts or experiences on these 
topics, which are often particularly heavy for 
participants.  
The West Harlem Community Restoration and Reentry 
Project (WHCRRP) is a multi-faceted program created in 
response to a June 2014 law enforcement intervention 
that resulted in the arrest and prosecution of 103 indi-
viduals living in Manhattanville and Grant housing 
developments and surrounding areas. Specifically, the 
WHCRRP sought to promote healing and reconciliation 
among community members, as well as between the 
community and law enforcement. Operating in partner-
ship with Osborne Association and the Tayshana 
“Chicken” Murphy Foundation (TCMF), the WHCRRP 
aimed to support community members who have recent-
ly returned, or are soon to return, from incarceration 
and strengthen the capacity of local community-based 
organizations to provide services and support violence 
prevention. Services were provided to the focus popula-
tion using a three-pronged approach: (1) credible messen-
ger mentoring; (2) restorative justice; and (3) a capaci-
ty-building incubator for local organizations.  
The Research Triangle Institute (RTI) conducted both a 
process and outcome evaluation of WHCCRP. The 
process evaluation found that although implementation 
of the program was greatly impacted by COVID-19, the 
program remained focused on providing targeted 
services that promoted community healing. Key to 
fostering healing were Credible Messengers and their 
ability to build trusting relationships with participants 
and the broader West Harlem community. The outcome 
evaluation revealed  participants’ sense of distrust 
toward law enforcement and mixed feelings about their 
sense of belonging in the community as a result of the 
2014 LEI. Additionally, program participants remained 
free of rearrest for longer periods than non-participants, 
potentially thanks to a reported strong sense of personal 
resilience.    
CASE STUDY:  WEST HARLEM REENTRY 
AND RESTORATION PROJECT

9
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System 
Training Staff on Trauma and its Effects Enhances 
Participant Experiences
Many people who come into contact with the legal 
system have experienced various forms of trauma 
(e.g., exposure to violence, neglect, or physical or 
emotional abuse), highlighting the need for 
program staff and facilitators to use a trauma-
responsive approach26 when working with these 
populations.  
Many people who come into contact 
with the legal system have 
experienced various forms of trauma 
(e.g., exposure to violence, neglect, or 
physical or emotional abuse), 
highlighting the need for program 
staff and facilitators to use a trauma-
responsive approach when working 
with these populations. 
The Trauma-Informed Abusive Partner Intervention Program (TI-APIP) is operated by the Urban Resource 
Institute in New York City. The program aims to hold abusive individuals accountable by helping them un-
derstand and take responsibility for their abusive behavior; develop alternatives to using violence and con-
trol in relationships; and change the attitudes and beliefs used to justify the abuse. By incorporating trau-
ma-informed principles, such as opt-in wraparound support and flexible attendance policies, the TI-APIP 
aims to engage abusive partners more effectively in programming in order to achieve these goals. 
The Urban Institute is conducting a comprehensive process and outcome evaluation of TI-APIP. The process 
evaluation found that staff successfully implemented trauma-informed, holistic, wraparound programming, 
with regular, active participant engagement. The forthcoming outcome evaluation examines the differences 
in recidivism outcomes (e.g., subsequent arrests, dispositions/convictions, jail bookings) and likelihood of 
reoffending between the treatment group (i.e., TI-APIP participants) and individuals who were eligible for the 
program but opted not to participate. 
CASE STUDY: TRAUMA-INFORMED ABUSIVE PARTNER INTERVENTION PROGRAM
The TI-APIP curriculum is built upon trauma-
informed27 principles to help people heal in hopes 
that they will be more willing and ready to alter 
their behavior – particularly as it pertains to using 
violence and perpetuating negative gender roles. 
Staff work with participants to identify and treat 
symptoms of trauma, as well as provide education 
on healthy relationships. Program facilitators also 
recognize that how they engage with participants 
and provide instruction must also include trauma-
responsive practices. Interviews with facilitators 
highlighted their commitment to transparency 
with information and honesty about the goals of 
their interactions with participants.  

10
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
The NYC Health Justice Network (HJN) also incor-
porates a trauma-informed philosophy, as it aims 
to engage clients with histories of trauma, recog-
nize the presence of its symptoms, and acknowl-
edge the role it has played in their lives. In particu-
lar, the program uses the Social Resilience Model 
(SRM) to train and empower providers and staff to 
deploy behavioral modification and self-regulation 
skills to respond to specific emotional and physical 
symptoms in participants triggered by trauma. 
CHWs also receive training on how to work with 
participants who have experienced trauma and 
adapt their approach to meet the specific needs of 
individuals reentering the community after 
incarceration. 
New York City’s Health Justice Network (NYC HJN) was 
developed by the NYC Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene (DOHMH). It aimed to support individuals’ 
well-being and reintegration following release, thereby 
reducing their likelihood of future involvement with the 
criminal legal system. The HJN model uses a trauma 
and resilience-informed approach with a network of 
peer community health workers (CHWs) with lived 
criminal legal system experience and an understanding 
of the health and social service landscape; these CHWs 
use their experience and training to connect people who 
were recently released from incarceration with health 
and social services. CHWs conduct outreach at halfway 
houses, transitional hotels, and partner communi-
ty-based organizations to individuals who have been 
released from incarceration within the previous three 
years. Participants then work with CHWs to secure 
documentation, access health insurance, and address 
primary and dental care. CHWs also work to ensure that 
participants’ materials needs are met by connecting 
them to employment, housing, and legal support. 
The NYU-CUNY Prevention Research Center (PRC) 
conducted an implementation assessment and outcome 
evaluation of the NYC HJN to understand participant 
experiences with the program, CHWs’ navigation efforts, 
and the program’s impact on future criminal legal sys-
tem involvement. PRC’s findings highlight the spectrum 
of service needs of program clients and the role of CHWs 
in helping these individuals navigate the reentry pro-
cess, address critical needs, and avoid future legal system 
involvement. Additionally, NYC HJN clients were found 
to have a lower number of rearrests at 6 months and 12 
months compared to non-clients. Other criminal legal 
outcomes, such as rates of reconviction and reincarcera-
tion, trended lower among NYC HJN clients, but were 
not significantly different between the two groups. 
CASE STUDY:  NEW YORK CITY’S HEALTH 
JUSTICE NETWORK

11
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System 
Through the CIP Reentry Initiative (CIP Initiative), 
the Institute of Justice and Opportunity (IJO) and 
State University of New York (SUNY) hosted three 
Learning Exchanges and a workshop on trauma-re-
sponsive educational practice in correctional 
settings. Furthermore, resource guides equipped 
college providers with the necessary tools to devel-
op programs that are responsive to the unique 
environment of correctional facilities. For in-
stance, SUNY’s Higher Education for the Justice-
Involved (HEJI) team led the creation of a faculty 
recruitment and training resource guide. Included 
in this guide was a structured discussion for staff 
and faculty about the trauma incarcerated students 
may have endured and how that may have impact-
ed their schooling experience and future educa-
tional choices, as well as the reality that some are 
learning to be successful in the classroom for the 
first time. 
Shared Lived Experience is Important for Building 
Trust with Participants 
Shared lived experience among diversion and 
reentry program staff is crucial because it fosters a 
deeper understanding and empathy for the chal-
lenges individuals face because of contact with the 
criminal legal system. NYC HJN utilizes communi-
ty health workers (CHWs) who have prior involve-
ment with the criminal legal system (e.g., prior 
incarceration) and have common lived experiences 
with potential clients. This shared experience is 
key to CHWs’ ability to build and maintain trust 
with their clients and fully support them through 
the reentry process. CHWs additionally receive 
training on social resilience28 and the value of 
using shared language (i.e., terms related to health-
care and the legal system) to make sure clients feel 
supported by others familiar with the challenges 
and needs of reentry. 
Similarly, the WHCRRP employed credible mes-
sengers (CMs) who had relevant lived experience, 
such as prior legal system involvement, and who 
In 2017, CJII created the College-in-Prison Reentry 
Initiative (CIP) to expand access to postsecondary pro-
grams across New York State (NYS) prisons. The initia-
tive had four principal aims: 1) provide funding to local 
colleges and universities to enroll more students, offer 
more courses, and expand degree programs in correc-
tional facilities; 2) establish shared program/curricular 
standards, align common course requirements and 
offerings, and in doing so, enable transfer credits be-
tween funded programs; 3) strengthen the reentry sup-
port infrastructure; and 4) exchange best practices and 
provide technical assistance for college-in-prison pro-
grams statewide. From its inception through 2022, CIP 
invested $7.3 million in postsecondary education in NYS 
correctional settings, serving 931 students in total from 
seven higher education institutions in 17 prisons 
statewide.  
CUNY ISLG conducted a five year, mixed-methods pro-
cess evaluation of CIP and found that the Initiative was 
successful in increasing access to higher education in 
NYS prisons, while raising several important insights 
about system-wide coordination, curricula alignment, 
and the provision of reentry resources. In addition, the 
Vera Institute of Justice conducted an outcome evalua-
tion of CIP to assess the benefits of college-in-prison 
participation for NYS students who were enrolled in the 
expanded programming across the state. The interim 
outcome report found that CIP students had a 66 percent 
lower risk of reconviction relative to comparable 
non-students. 
CASE STUDY:  COLLEGE-IN-PRISON 
REENTRY INITIATIVE

12
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
had witnessed a positive transformation in their 
own lives. In interviews, CMs expressed that the 
relationships they built with individuals based on 
their shared lived experience were core to their 
impact, with one CM specifically stating:  
“It’s not all about the training. You 
can train somebody. You can send 
somebody to school for this, and they 
can come home and still not know 
what to do because it’s not... It’s not 
that black and white.” 
By leveraging their shared experience, CMs estab-
lished strong and trusting relationships with 
program participants, which facilitated effective 
lines of communication, increased attention to 
risks like violence in the community, and helped 
them mentor participants to understand or miti-
gate maladaptive impulses. CMs reoriented indi-
viduals away from violence, instead helping them 
develop positive life goals, heal from their trauma, 
and take care of each other as a community. One 
participant expressed gratitude for CMs, sharing:  
“It’s a relief feeling, like you “got 
somebody”, compared to feeling like 
there’s nobody or no hope. You have 
somebody that’s going to support you, 
put you in a direction you need to. As 
long as you [have] that type of indi-
vidual [to] do the footwork, then you 
get the help that you need.” 
Reaching Individuals Most Impacted by the 
Criminal Legal System Requires Focus and 
Intentionality  
Equitable access to programming requires services 
to be designed to reach and benefit the individuals 
most impacted by the criminal legal system. By 
expanding access to postsecondary educational 
programs in New York and increasing the number 
of programs, courses, and degree paths available to 
incarcerated individuals, the College in Prison 
Reentry Initiative (CIP) was able to reach a popula-
tion that has traditionally been excluded from 
access to higher education–CIP students were 
generally representative of the total NYC prison 
population (50 percent Black, 26 percent white, and 
17 percent Hispanic).  
Yet, structural barriers can complicate the aims of 
diversion and reentry programs to address histori-
cal injustice. A significant challenge emerged in 
the Project Reset diversion program related to a 
lack of reliable or accurate contact information. 
The program design required the three providers 
to reach out to eligible participants and offer them 
the opportunity to engage in programming. As a 
result of differences in successful contact and 
response rates by race and ethnicity, more than 
two-thirds (65.2 percent) of eligible individuals 
identified as white-Hispanic, Black non-Hispanic, 
and Black-Hispanic, while only 58.8 percent of 
program completers fell into these racial and 
ethnic categories. This difference in composition 
between eligible and actual participants indicates 
how realities on the ground may unintentionally 
contribute to racial and ethnic disparities in the 
criminal legal system, as well as the need to be 
aware of and work around implementation issues 
as they emerge.
Flexible Programming Allows Various Pathways 
for Participant Engagement 
Understanding that participation and progress for 
those with criminal legal system involvement is not 
linear, diversion and reentry programs should aim 
to create flexible programming that can adapt to 
participants’ unique circumstances. Project Reset 
offered a number of activity options, such as indi-
vidual and group counseling, workshops related to 
social resilience and restorative justice, Narcan/
Naloxone treatment training, and art-based activi-
ties. Each of these options incorporated restorative 
principles and elements of psychoeducation, but 

13
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System 
mental health care. Recognizing the importance of 
addressing these material needs, CJII programs 
regularly provided access and/or referrals to re-
sources and services specifically tailored to the 
populations they served. To best understand the 
needs of their participants, programs often admin-
istered needs assessments upon intake. 
Additionally, some programs relied on the relation-
ships established between key staff—such as 
CHWs, CMs, counselors, and facilitators—and 
participants to identify needs through one-on-one 
conversations or as participants engaged in pro-
gram activities over time. Once needs were identi-
fied, participants could be referred to external 
services or, if feasible, receive these services direct-
ly within the program. The sections below high-
light the most common needs identified by partici-
pants across programs and how the programs 
worked to address these needs.
Employment and Finances 
CCF BOSS, through its CAP programming, sup-
ported participants in their transition from career 
readiness to job placement and retention. This 
support began with a career-readiness assessment 
focusing on resume and cover letter building, soft 
skills, and digital literacy. CAP participants subse-
quently engaged in career curriculum models 
based on assessment of their needs, and were 
paired with career coaching that included personal 
financial counseling, interviewing techniques, 
technology assistance workshops, and on-the-job 
coaching. Engagement in CAP, therefore, ranged 
from minimal, on-off services to fully hands-on 
immersive experiences with possible internship 
placement. Understanding that education and 
employment are closely tied, CAP participants 
without degrees were eligible to co-enroll in ASP to 
receive support in both areas and receive stipends 
for their participation. 
Students within the CIP Initiative also expressed 
great need for financial and employment support. 
For example, in both survey responses and focus 
were otherwise open to eligible individuals accord-
ing to their interests and logistical considerations.  
TI-APIP staff also emphasize flexibility with regard 
to program attendance. Instead of dismissing a 
participant after their first few absences, staff take 
into account the trauma experienced by the popu-
lation they serve and aim not to use dismissal as 
the first tool in dealing with poor attendance. 
Participants who were 30 minutes late to a session 
were asked to journal and reflect as a way to make 
up for the missed portion of the session, rather 
than being  marked absent. Furthermore, partici-
pants were allowed to miss and make up three 
sessions at a later date. Only by the fourth absence 
would staff consider dismissal from the program, 
but would still weigh the option of inviting the 
participant to begin the curriculum again.   
WHCCRP and NYC HJN acknowledged that for 
individuals reentering the community, balancing 
programing with the challenges of the reentry 
process can be difficult. As a result, progress and 
participation in these programs may not always be 
linear. Both programs allowed participants to 
engage in the services they felt would benefit them 
and disengage when they felt their needs had been 
met. Often, these programs considered the fulfill-
ment of participants’ identified needs as a key 
indicator of program completion. CHWs and CMs 
continued to check in with disengaged participants 
periodically to assess any changes in their needs, 
and if there were changes, remind them of how the 
program could help address those needs.  
INDIVIDUALS INVOLVED IN THE 
CRIMINAL LEGAL SYSTEM OFTEN FACE 
UNMET NEEDS DUE TO COMPLEX, 
STRUCTURAL SOCIAL EXCLUSION   
Individuals involved with the criminal legal sys-
tem often have longstanding, unmet needs, which 
are often tied to structural exclusion and include 
undereducation, limited employment opportuni-
ties/histories, and inadequate access to health and 

14
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
groups of CIP participants, one of the main priori-
ties for students was determining how they would 
support themselves following release and how 
(limited) financial resources would impact their 
decision to reenroll in school. One student expressed: 
“I plan to enroll [in school] upon release, 
but this is not the priority and is de-
pendent on things like cost and 
availability.”  
Additionally, about four in five (81 percent) students 
identified the cost of tuition as an obstacle when 
asked about the various barriers to reenrollment. In 
response, two providers offered to help students pay 
for their coursework following release, while another 
held presentations on financial aid options available 
for paying for education. Relatedly, students empha-
sized a need for basic job and skills support, and 
more than two-thirds (70 percent) identified needing 
to work as an obstacle to re-enrollment. One provider 
also acknowledged these concerns, sharing that 
“students don’t feel prepared to jump right into the job 
market [upon release]” and need additional support to 
build that confidence. Employment-focused reentry 
support offered by some of the providers included 
in-prison job fairs, career centered workshops and 
mock interviews, as well as advice on how to talk 
about employment gaps as a result of incarceration.  
YNY created an optional Reset Ultra component 
specifically for Project Reset participants, allowing 
individuals to opt in to monthly events (and receive a 
stipend for their participation) for referrals to em-
ployment-related support, presentations from com-
munity partners on paid opportunities, or other 
community resources. Among WHCRRP partici-
pants, employment was among the top needs indicat-
ed upon program enrollment, with 82 percent of 
participants receiving referrals to vocational and/or 
workforce services (e.g., job readiness or skills train-
ing, finding employment, and support from an em-
ployment specialist). In-house, WHCRRP offered 
College and Community Fellowship’s (CCF) Build-
Out of Students Services (BOSS) project provided 
formerly incarcerated women in New York City 
with educational and employment services, in part 
by helping them overcome financial and, for some, 
caregiving obstacles. BOSS included three main 
components: the Academic Support Program (ASP), 
which aided women currently enrolled or hoping to 
enroll in college; the Career Advancement Program 
(CAP), which offered employment assistance and 
job placement; and Uplift Mentor (UM),29 which 
connected women to post-release peer support 
consisting of 1:1 and group mentoring with program 
peers.  
The Vera Institute of Justice conducted a process 
evaluation that detailed implementation of the 
BOSS program. Across program components, partic-
ipants reported positive relationships with staff and 
the impact of financial support as particularly 
beneficial as they worked toward their academic 
and career goals. Out of the 175 study participants, 
21 received a post-secondary degree or credential 
and 13 secured a job or internship placement. 
CASE STUDY:  COLLEGE AND 
COMMUNITY FELLOWSHIP’S BUILD 
OUT OF STUDENT SERVICES (BOSS)

15
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System 
multiple Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA) training sessions to help 
participants work toward an OSHA 30 scaffolding 
certification.  
Education
Both CCF’s BOSS program and the CIP Initiative 
acknowledged the importance of providing individ-
uals currently incarcerated and returning to the 
community with educational support to improve 
their transition post-incarceration. Thus, each of 
these programs embedded educational services as 
integral components of their work with this popula-
tion. CCF BOSS developed its ASP to help partici-
pants pursue and progress through academic de-
grees. Through this support, participants received 
individualized academic counseling to help navigate 
preparing for college (i.e., filling out applications, 
gathering transcripts) and enrolling in college or 
certificate programs. For participants who were 
parents and/or caregivers, BOSS provided additional 
support through its multi-generational services (e.g., 
stipends, parent/guardian and child study sessions, 
and group guided discussion related to education, 
time management, and parenting skills). By the end 
of the program, more than 20 participants received 
a post-secondary degree, with the ability to continue 
programming if they wished to receive support for 
other degree interests.   
Similarly, the CIP Initiative helped increase access 
to education for incarcerated people in NYS. Prior to 
this initiative, just over 1,000 incarcerated individu-
als in NYS received college-level instruction each 
year. Through the initiative, 931 students were 
served, with about 75 percent of those individuals 
enrolling in college for the first time. Most students 
enrolled in Associate’s degrees (78 percent), followed 
by Bachelor’s degrees (15 percent), and specialized or 
certificate programs (6 percent). During implemen-
tation, 86 students completed their degree, with the 
vast majority completing prior to release. Of those 
who were released and had not yet completed their 
degree, students had satisfied nearly half (45 
percent) of the credits required for their degrees. 
Furthermore, the CIP Initiative worked with provid-
ers to develop academic reentry plans for students 
to continue their education post-release.
Health & Mental Health
PRC’s implementation assessment of the NYC HJN 
showed the most commonly reported healthcare 
needs were primary care (52 percent), followed by 
dental care (17 percent), health promotion/education 
(e.g., engaging with care providers, educating clients 
about health risks, navigation to health insurance 
enrollment; 13 percent), and mental health/emotion-
al support (12 percent). Given the substantial burden 
of healthcare needs among people released from 
incarceration, NYC HJN intentionally developed 
programming to help clients access health-related 
services. Specifically, CHWs create a care plan for 
clients and show them how to make appointments 
and offer to accompany them if needed. CHWs 
facilitate service connection to three primary care 
clinics in NYC, which provide routine health main-
tenance and general healthcare as needed.  
For Project Reset, CCI offered short-term individual 
counseling services when a client’s intake assess-
ment indicated group sessions were not appropriate. 
In such cases, specialized staff (e.g., social workers, 
therapists) incorporated elements of the group 
curriculum into 45-60 minute individualized ses-
sions, including approaches such as motivational 
interviewing, cognitive behavioral therapy to en-
courage change, and identifying unhealthy patterns 
of coping that may lead to future criminal behavior. 
In some cases, the social worker or therapist created 
a service plan and referred the participant to off-site 
providers. One participant who received individual 
counseling services praised the program, saying:  
“I had a great experience, there was a 
therapist…she offered free therapy for 
3 months, she and I connected, [it’s 
the] best thing I’ve ever done.”

16
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
Other Material Needs & Supports
TI-APIP staff reported that most of its participants experience food insecurity and/or lack reliable housing. These 
factors, among others, are known to contribute to trauma and are associated with a higher risk of involvement with 
the criminal legal system. To meet the immediate needs of their participants, TI-APIP gives participants 
MetroCards, snacks or full meals during in-person sessions, and works with participants to secure supplies or 
support for services as other needs are identified. In addition, both the NYC HJN and WHCRRP recognized that 
housing instability and documentation requirements (e.g., identification, driver’s license, Social Security card) can 
create barriers to participants accessing or addressing other needs, such as employment or education. CHWs and 
CMs worked with participants to help them navigate through the process of applying for public assistance with 
housing, as well as the paperwork required to obtain vital documents. 

17
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System 
Overall, the potential impact of diversion and 
reentry programs lies in their capacity to offer 
more compassionate, effective, and sustainable 
solutions that benefit not just individuals involved 
in the criminal legal system but also their families 
and communities. These programs represent a 
much-needed shift towards a more holistic and 
humane approach to justice and accountability, 
one that aims to prevent crime, support rehabilita-
tion, and promote long-term well-being and contri-
bution to society. To that end, the lessons learned 
from these CJII case studies and evaluations un-
derscore several recommendations for stakehold-
ers, funders, and policymakers to consider when 
working with justice-involved populations: 
FOSTER CONTINUOUS AND 
COMPREHENSIVE CARE  
Prevent reinvolvement in the criminal legal system 
by ensuring that individuals in diversion programs 
or who are reentering the community have ongoing 
support and access to resources. Comprehensive, 
coordinated care can help individuals build stability 
in multiple areas of their lives by increasing access 
to tailored, holistic support. This commitment 
relies on coordinators or case managers who can 
support a person’s transition back to the communi-
ty and connect them to additional services to meet 
their needs. Programs also benefit from effective 
coordination between agencies (e.g., law enforce-
ment, court systems, service providers, CBOs). 
Additionally, maintaining reliable and accurate 
contact information for participants aids in service 
providers’ and program staff’s ability to provide 
ongoing support.  
PROVIDE COMPREHENSIVE STAFF 
TRAINING AND SOURCE STAFF WITH 
EXPERIENCE TO ENHANCE WORK 
WITH INDIVIDUALS INVOLVED WITH 
THE CRIMINAL LEGAL SYSTEM   
Staff in diversion and reentry programs should 
receive comprehensive training and have experi-
ence in working with individuals with criminal 
legal system involvement. Training focused on 
informed, compassionate, and effective support 
helps prepare staff for many of the challenges this 
population faces (e.g., trauma, complex needs, 
systemic barriers). Additionally, experience among 
staff can make it easier to build trust with partici-
pants, tailor interventions to individuals’ needs, 
and engage participants more effectively, especially 
if there is shared lived experience and first-hand 
understanding of the nuances and impact of in-
volvement in the criminal legal system. Ultimately, 
well-trained and experienced staff are better able 
to create supportive environments, foster positive 
relationships, and help individuals avoid future 
legal system involvement.  
ADDRESS MATERIAL NEEDS AS PART 
OF PROGRAMMING TO AID IN 
PARTICIPANT SUCCESS 
Diversion and reentry programs must provide compre-
hensive support to ensure long-term success and avoid 
future legal system involvement. One way to achieve this 
aim is to meet individuals’ basic needs—such as food 
security and housing support—while pursuing lon-
ger-term needs around employment, education, and 
health and mental health. Once these are met, partici-
pants may find themselves more engaged in program-
ming, and thus able to establish the foundation needed 
for successful rehabilitation and reintegration into the 
community. 
Recommendations

18
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
ALLOW FOR FLEXIBILITY, MULTIPLE 
POINTS OF ENGAGEMENT, AND RE-
ENGAGEMENT IN PROGRAMMING 
Given that individuals with criminal legal system 
involvement present with a wide range of needs 
and histories, programming to serve this popula-
tion should be flexible and designed to support 
non-linear engagement. A rigid, one-size-fits-all 
approach may fail to adequately support many 
such individuals. By creating flexibility, programs 
can meet individuals where they are, allowing 
them to engage with a variety of services at differ-
ent stages and as their circumstances evolve. 
Allowing participants to access the support when 
they need it most, without fear of being penalized 
for lapses in participation, may increase their 
likelihood of success both in and out of the pro-
gram. Multiple points of engagement, and room for 
reengagement, encourages participants to be con-
nected to services based on their needs at different 
times, improving their stability in the long-term.
INCREASE COMMUNITY AWARENESS 
OF PROGRAMS, INVEST IN PROVIDER 
RESPONSIVENESS, AND HIGHLIGHT 
BENEFITS TO IMPROVE RECRUITMENT 
AND ATTENDANCE.
Many of the individuals who would benefit from 
diversion and reentry programs may not know 
these programs exist and/or lack the ability to 
access these opportunities. Others may have had 
prior negative experiences with service providers 
and, accordingly, avoid them. Increasing public 
awareness and provider responsiveness allows 
eligible individuals to be informed about the sup-
port available to them and may help them become 
more apt to take advantage of their benefits. Public 
awareness and education surrounding the struc-
tural causes of crime and the need for restorative 
and rehabilitative approaches instead of punitive 
ones also contributes to reducing stigma. In addi-
tion to potentially reaching more potential partici-
pants, increasing awareness of the core values of 
these programs promotes a more welcoming and 
supportive environment as individuals reinte-
grate into society. 
MONITOR AND ADDRESS INEQUITIES 
IN PROGRAM ENGAGEMENT AND 
COMPLETION
It is important for providers to be attentive to 
inequities in program engagement and comple-
tion, as benefits of program engagement may not 
always be experienced by those most affected by 
the criminal legal system. In reality, inequities in 
engagement and completion can actually com-
pound existing disparities in the criminal legal 
system, rather than reduce them. Toward this 
end, it is vital to devote resources to reaching 
eligible individuals, maintaining constant touch 
points with participants and intervening, as 
necessary, to ensure individuals engage mean-
ingfully and complete program requirements.
DEPLOY DATA-DRIVEN APPROACHES 
TO ASSESS IMPACT   
Finally, it is important to use data to assess the 
effectiveness of diversion and reentry programs 
in reducing recidivism or other measures of 
criminal legal system involvement, as well as to 
adjust program approaches as needed. Assessing 
resources and rehabilitative approaches for indi-
viduals with criminal legal histories is also 
important in the context of the frequent critique 
of these programs playing a role in increasing 
crime, rather than deterring it. 

19
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System 
This brief is part of ISLG’s series on lessons learned from the CJII. To view the full series of briefs, see here.
In addition to this brief on the importance of addressing trauma as part of public safety and community 
wellbeing initiatives, this series includes briefs on:
•	
Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration for Greater Impact
•	
Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and Mental Well-Being
•	
Understanding, Reaching & Engaging Excluded Populations
To access the other briefs and the evaluations funded through CJII, including those referenced in this brief, 
please see here.

20
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
Endnotes
1.	
Emily Widra,“States of Incarceration: The Global  
Context 2024.” Prisonpolicy.org. June 2024. https://
www.prisonpolicy.org/global/2024.html. 
2.	
 Durose, M. R., Cooper, A. D., & Snyder, H. N. (2014). 
Recidivism of prisoners released in 30 states in 
2005: Patterns from 2005 to 2010 (Vol. 28). 
Washington, DC: US Department of Justice, Office of 
Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics.
3.	
Prison Policy Initiative, “Recidivism and Reentry.” 
Prisonpolicy.org. 2019. https://www.prisonpolicy.
org/research/recidivism_and_reentry/.
4.	
 Kirk, D. S., & Wakefield, S. (2018). Collateral 
consequences of punishment: A critical review and 
path forward. Annual Review of Criminology, 1(1), 
171-194.
5.	
 Feingold, Z. R. (2021). The stigma of incarceration 
experience: A systematic review. Psychology, Public 
Policy, and Law, 27(4), 550.
6.	
Emily Widra,“States of Incarceration: The Global 
Context 2024.” Prisonpolicy.org. June 2024. https://
www.prisonpolicy.org/global/2024.html.
7.	
Durose, M. R., Cooper, A. D., & Snyder, H. N. (2014). 
Recidivism of prisoners released in 30 states in 
2005: Patterns from 2005 to 2010 (Vol. 28). 
Washington, DC: US Department of Justice, Office 
of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics.
8.	
Prison Policy Initiative, “Recidivism and Reentry.” 
Prisonpolicy.org. 2019. https://www.prisonpolicy.
org/research/recidivism_and_reentry/.
9.	
Kirk, D. S., & Wakefield, S. (2018). Collateral 
consequences of punishment: A critical review and 
path forward. Annual Review of Criminology, 1(1), 
171-194.
10.	 Feingold, Z. R. (2021). The stigma of incarceration 
experience: A systematic review. Psychology, Public 
Policy, and Law, 27(4), 550.
11.	 Sentencing Project. (n.d). Americans with Criminal 
Records. Americans-with-Criminal-Records-
Poverty-and-Opportunity-Profile.pdf.
12.	 Alexi Jones and Wendy Sawyer, “Arrest, Release, 
Repeat: How Police and Jails Are Misused to 
Respond to Social Problems.” Prisonpolicy.org. 
August 2019. https://www.prisonpolicy.org/reports/
repeatarrests.html.
13.	 Hawks L., Wang E. A., Howell B., Woolhandler S., 
Himmelstein D. U., Bor D., McCormick D. (2020). 
Health status and health care utilization of US 
adults under probation: 2015–2018. American 
Journal of Public Health, 110(9), 1411–1417.
14.	 Garcia-Grossman, I. R., Cenzer, I., Steinman, M. A., 
& Williams, B. A. (2023). History of incarceration 
and its association with geriatric and chronic 
health outcomes in older adulthood. JAMA 
Network Open, 6(1), e2249785-e2249785.
15.	  Nowotny K. M., Rogers R. G., Boardman J. D. (2017). 
Racial disparities in health conditions among 
prisoners compared with the general population. 
SSM-Population Health, 3, 487–496.
16.	  Batterham R. W., Hawkins M., Collins P., 
Buchbinder R., Osborne R. H. (2016). Health literacy: 
Applying current concepts to improve health 
services and reduce health inequalities. Public 
Health, 132, 3–12.
17.	 National Alliance on Mental Illness, 
“Criminalization of People with Mental Illness.” 
NAMI, 2024. https://www.nami.org/Advocacy/
Policy-Priorities/Stopping-Harmful-Practices/
Criminalization-of-People-with-Mental-Illness/.
18.	 Kaeble D., Glaze L., Tsoutis A., Minton T. (2015). 
Correctional populations in the United States. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice.
19.	 Massoglia M., Pridemore W. A. (2015). Incarceration 
and health. Annual Review of Sociology, 41, 291-310.
20.	 Yi, Y., Turney, K., & Wildeman, C. (2017). Mental 
health among jail and prison inmates. American 
Journal of Men’s Health, 11(4), 900-909.
21.	 Ositelu, M. O. (2019). Equipping Individuals for Life 
beyond Bars.[Research Brief]. New America.
22.	 Davis, L. M. (2013). Evaluating the effectiveness of 
correctional education: A meta-analysis of pro-
grams that provide education to incarcerated 
adults.

21
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals Involved in the Criminal Legal System 
The CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance is a good governance think-and-do tank. We craft 
the research, policies, partnerships, and infrastructures necessary to  
help government and public institutions work more effectively, efficiently and equitably.  
For more information, visit islg.cuny.edu.
23.	 Wang, L., & Bertram, W. (2022). New data on 
formerly incarcerated people’s employment reveal 
labor market injustices. Prison Policy Initiative, 8.
24.	 “New Report: 39 Percent of Prisoners Are 
Unnecessarily behind Bars.” Brennan Center for 
Justice. 2021. https://www.brennancenter.org/
our-work/analysis-opinion/new-report-39-per-
cent-prisoners-are-unnecessarily-behind-bars.
25.	 “Criminal Justice Investment Initiative”. Criminal 
Justice Investment Initiative. September 19, 2023. 
https://cjii.org/focus-areas/diversion-and-reen-
try-support-2/.
26.	 A trauma-responsive approach involved in the 
application of trauma-informed care, and incorpo-
rates sensitivity to participants’ history of trauma 
and recognition that this history may affect how 
that person receives or engages in services. 
27.	  Trauma-informed approach refers to a framework 
of care that aims to engage people with histories of 
trauma, recognize the presence of trauma symp-
toms, acknowledge the role that trauma has played 
in their lives, and respond to the impact of trauma 
on individuals.
28.	  An approach to individual self-regulation, health 
and resilience that trains and empowers providers 
to deploy tangible self-regulation and behavioral 
modification skills in response to the specific 
physical and emotional symptoms triggered by 
trauma and stress.
29.	  Previously referred to as CCF’s Peer Mentoring 
Program (PMP)


===== BRIEF 5: Learning from Data to Strengthen Service Delivery =====

1
Learning from Data
Building Safer Communities 
Through the Criminal Justice 
Investment Initiative
Learning from  
Data to Strengthen 
Service Delivery
Research & Policy Brief
April 2026

2
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
AUTHORS
Neal Palmer 
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance
Brandon Martinez
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This brief is the culmination of many important partnerships. 
The District Attorney of New York (DANY) and its staff have 
been instrumental partners in funding and guiding the 
development of Criminal Justice Investment Initiative (CJII) 
since 2015. 
We are grateful to the community organizations who received 
CJII funding and made possible the robust evaluation of their 
programs. Accordingly, we also thank the evaluators for their 
insightful and creative approaches to evaluation, largely during 
and after the hugely disruptive COVID-19 pandemic. In 
addition, we thank the research participants for sharing their 
experiences in the programs.
Finally, we are thankful for our CUNY ISLG colleagues—this 
brief would have been impossible without Siobhán Carney and 
Patrick Hart for their leadership of CJII, and Carla Sinclair for 
support in editing and design. 
This brief is part of CUNY ISLG’s series on lessons 
learned from the Criminal Justice Investment Initiative 
to promote community safety.  
 
For other briefs in the series, see here.

3
Learning from Data
New York City has a rich network of communi-
ty-based organizations (CBOs) and other nonprof-
its that serve the city’s diverse and expansive 
neighborhoods. These organizations often have 
deep roots within the communities they serve 
and provide services through staff who under-
stand the city’s challenges and strengths. 
However, many CBOs—especially smaller, grass-
roots ones—do not have the opportunity to capi-
talize on this unique knowledge with infrastruc-
ture to collect, manage, and analyze data that can 
inform and highlight their impact. This gap be-
gins at the funding level, with many re-
quests-for-proposals (RFPs) failing to provide 
funding for data capacity training and technical 
assistance (TTA).
The CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance 
(CUNY ISLG) is a public sector consultancy that 
partners with governments, CBOs, and other 
institutions to facilitate more effective, efficient, 
and equitable systems that serve the public 
good—including through more robust collection 
and interpretation of data. We use data-informed 
approaches to implement and assess our partners’ 
programs, policies, and initiatives. This work can 
take the form of strategic planning, oversight and 
management, performance measurement, data 
and capacity building, evaluation, and other tools 
tailored to our partners’ goals and needs.
THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE INVESTMENT 
INITIATIVE
In 2015, CUNY ISLG launched the Criminal 
Justice Investment Initiative (CJII) in partnership 
with the Manhattan District Attorney’s Office 
(DANY). CJII is a first-of-its-kind investment in 
Manhattan’s communities, turning $250 million 
of criminal asset forfeiture funds into projects to 
improve community safety by supporting youth 
Introduction
and families, uplifting survivors of crime, strength-
ening effectiveness across systems, and more. 
After engaging in an information-gathering pro-
cess involving interviews with more than 250 
local experts and stakeholders, as well as analysis 
of administrative data covering dozens of system-
ic factors that have an impact on crime, CUNY 
ISLG and DANY developed a strategic plan for the 
initiative, which included investments in 
Prevention, Victim Support, Diversion/Reentry, 
and Cross-Systems Collaboration. Crucially, the 
initiative committed funding almost exclusively 
to CBOs, tapping into these organizations’ estab-
lished legitimacy and knowledge of the challenges 
they aim to address.
THE CRUCIAL ROLE OF DATA IN CJII
The strategic plan also named several core princi-
ples, including Collaboration Across Sectors and 
Commitment to Impactful and Sustainable 
Investments. It also committed to Data-Driven 
Decision Making, specifically to “collect and ana-
lyze data and evaluate investments using empirical 
evidence” and to “share what we learn to inform 
the field so that future work can learn from CJII’s 
strategic investments.”
This brief describes how this latter principle was 
pursued at each stage of the CJII. It identifies les-
sons learned and recommendations for future 
investment in—and partnership with—CBOs to 
make this work more effective and impactful. 
Overall, these lessons are useful to funders, evalu-
ators, program managers, and direct service pro-
viders committed to using data to strengthen their 
work. They pertain to solicitation and contracting, 
oversight and management, evaluation, training 
and capacity building, and communication and 
dissemination of research. 

4
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
SOLICITATION
Nearly all CJII funds were awarded via competitive 
solicitations/Requests for Proposals (RFPs). In 
total, CUNY ISLG and DANY released 31 solicita-
tions and funded 52 individual programs, 33 of 
which were evaluated by independent evaluators. 
Most solicitations asked applicants to articulate 
their overall goals, suggest possible measures and 
targets, and summarize their data collection and 
reporting capacity. Solicitations also specified that 
programs may be evaluated as part of CJII. 
Based on this experience, funders developing 
solicitations for CBOs should consider the follow-
ing to ensure data are front and center from the 
start:
RFPs should prompt applicants to describe their 
data capacity and data/research staffing. Even if 
these components are not scored parts of a propos-
al, they provide information to the funder on 
where support could be beneficial, as well as gaps 
that may make it difficult for providers and the 
funder to assess and communicate impact. 
Moreover, the process of taking stock of data ca-
pacity infrastructure and research staffing can 
support a program’s planning, implementation, 
and sustainability by encouraging critical reflec-
tion and adaptation along the way. In CJII, collect-
ing this information at the solicitation stage 
helped gauge which challenges grantees anticipat-
ed in data collection, reporting, and infrastructure. 
Regardless of existing capacity, CUNY ISLG 
worked with programs to develop performance 
indicators and tailor the training and technical 
assistance (TTA) offerings for CJII grantees.
RFPs should clearly state if evaluation is an expecta-
tion of funding. Funding conditions may include 
obligations for a program to share data with an 
external evaluator or work with evaluation teams to 
collect data beyond performance metrics. 
Solicitations should also specifically address whether 
a waiver of consent for administrative data is likely 
to be pursued and approved by an internal review 
board (IRB). Providing this information upfront, and 
the reasoning behind it, can help ensure consistent 
expectations across stakeholders. Revisiting these 
expectations in the initial communications after 
awarding funding can help ensure that the develop-
ment and program teams are aligned prior to 
implementation.
The process of taking stock of data 
capacity infrastructure and research 
staffing can support a program’s 
planning, implementation, and 
sustainability.
CONTRACTING AND FUNDING 
CJII contracts included terms related to grantees’ 
obligation to share aggregate (non-identifiable) data 
with ISLG through a quarterly performance report. 
Other requirements often included working with 
evaluation partners to collect and analyze data, 
continuing to provide performance data and work 
with an evaluator through an additional “data year” 
after program implementation funding ended, and 
entering into a data use agreement with an evaluator 
if necessary for the sharing of identifiable data. 
Initiative funding aimed to cover the full costs of 
program implementation, including the costs of 
retaining data and providing analytic support 
through this data year. 
Embedding Data at Each 
Stage of CJII

5
Learning from Data
Based on this experience, funders contracting with 
CBOs should consider the following in pursuit of 
data-informed decision-making:
Involve data/research and program staff from 
applicant organizations in contract negotiations, 
rather than just development and legal teams, to 
ensure that all stakeholders have a shared under-
standing of expectations and funding conditions. 
Just as important as using clear RFP language, the 
negotiation process provides an opportunity to 
align stakeholder expectations across development 
and program teams. It also allows for early conver-
sations around expectations for data sharing and 
evaluation during implementation.
Assess current data capacity at the time of funding. 
In some cases, CJII applicants committed to data 
sharing, and described their data infrastructure, in 
ways that exceeded their actual capacity or willing-
ness to share such data. Given the limited data 
capacity of many CBOs, in-person site visits and 
video calls can provide insight into where support 
could be beneficial after an award of funding. 
Assess fit between program and evaluator prior to 
contract execution. In CJII, evaluators were selected 
independently via separate competitive solicitation 
processes. Although research feasibility was an 
aspect of proposal scoring, research designs often 
need to be reworked to better align with program 
implementation, existing data infrastructure, and 
capacity of teams. In most cases, strong working 
relationships developed between evaluators and 
programs, and they used these relationships to 
adapt initial designs to be more practicable. 
To ensure that evaluations are designed with pro-
grams in mind and stakeholders are well-aligned, 
conversations between program staff and potential 
research teams may be useful prior to final selec-
tion of an evaluator. Creating a process for input on 
research design, client protection, institutional 
values, and goals from programs resulted in more 
feasible designs, established early communication 
channels, and ensured values and priorities were 
named and recognized, all the while preserving an 
independent scoring process designed to result in 
the strongest independent evaluation design. For 
example, the Mount Sinai School of Medicine met 
with CUNY ISLG and the Center for Trauma 
Innovation prior to developing evaluation protocols 
and instruments to discuss the program’s commit-
ment to upholding trauma-informed principles and 
prosecting clients’ agency. The conversation helped 
the evaluation partners to understand the program’s 
priorities and explore research approaches that 
aligned with the goals and values of the program.
Dedicate financial resources and hands-on data 
support as part of the funding package. A common 
maxim in research is “Bad data in, bad data out.” A 
research project is only as good as the data it relies 
on, and good data can only be collected and provid-
ed if resources are allocated toward that end. 
Funders can improve data quality by contributing 
resources specifically to the development and imple-
mentation of case management systems, as well as 
to the staff that manage them: data analysts are a 
central pillar of a program’s data infrastructure, as 
they are responsible for data quality and data shar-
ing—both of which are important to funders and 
programs. Investing early in data capacity supports 
continual improvement within an organization, 
both during and after funding.

6
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
OVERSIGHT AND MANAGEMENT 
CJII required programs to submit operational 
plans during a planning phase, which described 
their program logic, service models, data infra-
structure/systems, staffing, and other compo-
nents. Alongside the development of their opera-
tional plans, CUNY ISLG worked with grantees to 
design a set of performance measures to help 
understand the implementation and impact of 
their respective programs. The measurement 
framework included core domains such as partici-
pant characteristics, outreach and engagement, 
service provision, and completion/impact, from 
which grantee-specific measures were developed. 
CUNY ISLG worked with grantees 
to design a set of performance 
measures to help understand the 
implementation and impact of 
their respective programs. 
Programs reported these quantitative items to 
CUNY ISLG quarterly in aggregate, non-identifi-
able form. Program leads also prepared qualitative 
reports that included information on challenges, 
strengths, opportunities, and successes achieved 
by the program. We then reviewed these data, 
identified any trends or opportunities, and dis-
cussed these observations with grantees during 
regular check-in calls. 
Based on this experience, funders seeking to 
enhance CBO performance reporting should:
Offer ongoing assistance, support, and training. 
Grantee capacity to collect and report data varied 
across CJII, dependent largely on general operating 
budgets and the presence of data-specific person-
nel. Accordingly, CUNY ISLG provided assistance 
in measuring, calculating, and reporting data as 
needed. This could include hiring additional on-site 
consultants, supporting data staff, working with 
programs to reflect on their input in performance 
measurement and evaluation designs (see more 
below), and other approaches. 
For example, CUNY ISLG staff provided guidance 
to ensure that performance measures were opera-
tionalized with utility and participant perspectives 
in mind, and offered assistance in calculating more 
complex measures, such as average length of ser-
vice engagement. These services fit within ISLG’s 
larger TTA approach, which offers support in 
programmatic, operational, and strategic areas. In 
addition, for programs that were new and/or un-
dergoing a process evaluation, CUNY ISLG and 
evaluators documented program logic models, 
which could then be used to identify gaps in logic 
and areas where programs might need additional 
resources. 
Finally, CUNY ISLG provided “performance mea-
surement plus” services to grantees when resourc-
es allowed. This included qualitative approaches 
such as focus groups, case file reviews, and surveys 
to diagnose issues that emerged in performance 
reporting and develop ways to address them. In 
these instances, CUNY ISLG provided on-the-
ground staff for research activities that programs 
otherwise would not have had the capacity or 
expertise to conduct. For instance, with the 
Community Navigators program, ISLG researchers 
conducted a survey of Navigators to understand 
their comfort working with the program’s focus 
populations and confidence with various compe-
tencies/responsibilities. This activity led to a 
better understanding of where the program needed 
more support—including additional training for 
working with specific focus populations, and for 
more consistent case notes and data practices. 

7
Learning from Data
Make the process participatory. During the pro-
gram planning period, CUNY ISLG staff and CBO 
program staff reviewed and offered feedback on 
draft reporting templates so that performance 
measures reflected and supported key aspects of 
program implementation. In doing so, rather than 
simply serving as metrics dictated by funders, the 
data provided insight into progress toward grantee 
goals and informed changes in programming. For 
example, to more accurately assess program dosage 
in the Center for Trauma Innovation (CTI), CUNY 
ISLG met several times with the CTI’s data liaison 
to improve internal calculations and more accu-
rately communicate how participants engaged 
with the program.
Throughout program implementation, CUNY ISLG 
reviewed performance data in regular check-ins 
with programs. Doing so provided a structure for 
stakeholders to consider how the data might illu-
minate unaddressed program needs as well as 
inform future programmatic and organizational 
strategies. Most recently, performance reports 
helped the CTI identify unanticipated, gen-
der-based differences in how participants engaged 
in therapeutic services. As a result, the program 
tweaked its service model to create gender-specific 
options that appealed to specific gender groups.
Support a data-driven culture. Even organizations 
with advanced reporting capacity often struggle to 
build data into their day-to-day operations. 
Throughout CJII, ISLG staff used quarterly check-
ins and data reviews to brainstorm and workshop 
ways data could be incorporated into program 
operations and to understand and respond to 
organizational and participant needs. 
These efforts helped programs understand changes 
in service provision during the COVID-19 pandem-
ic: at one Youth Opportunity Hub, participant 
needs shifted toward access to material needs (e.g., 
laptops, food, shelter) in the face of job loss and 
remote schooling. In the post-shutdown period, 
quarterly reviews helped the Hub understand how 
participants continued to use hybrid services to 
establish and sustain peer relationships across 
neighborhood boundaries. By investing in and 
incorporating these data into their regular prac-
tice, the program was better positioned to achieve 
its programing goals.
Address historical injustice. Ensuring that pro-
grams have accurate and reliable data is also a 
matter of equity and sustainability. Rather than 
serve as a distraction or divert resources away 
from programming, data can indicate differential 
engagement and benefits for various populations. 
They can also reflect disproportionate need and 
help direct resources to specific groups or areas. 
Alternatively, bad data may even preclude partici-
pation in unanticipated ways that exacerbate 
existing inequalities. For instance, RAND’s imple-
mentation assessment of the Project Reset diver-
sion program for low-level misdemeanors found 
that incomplete/inaccurate contact data resulted 
in lower engagement and completion rates among 
Black-Latine participants, who had been envi-
sioned to benefit more highly from the program. 
Finally, in CJII performance reporting, when possi-
ble, grantees reported subpopulation values for some 
metrics, such as dosage and completion by age, race, 
and gender, to indicate whether programs were 
meeting participant needs equitably. With better 
data, organizations can identify inequalities in ser-
vice provision and develop plans to address them. 

8
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
EVALUATION
Evaluations are useful tools for understanding how 
programs are designed and implemented, as well as 
their impact on participants and their communities. 
When pursued thoughtfully, evaluations can help 
strengthen program implementation and impact, as 
well as provide information that supports long-term 
program sustainability. 
CJII solicitations specified that funded programs 
may be evaluated by an external entity and, in 
such cases, required programs to work with these 
evaluators. CUNY ISLG identified programs 
optimal for evaluation based on whether they 
were new or innovative, whether their program 
models were “ready” for evaluation, and whether a 
strong research design was feasible. For the 
selected programs, CUNY ISLG worked with 
evaluation teams to develop research designs and 
functioned as a liaison between program staff and 
researchers to facilitate the evaluations. In total, 
33 of 52 funded programs were evaluated. Nearly 
all included a process or implementation 
component. About three-quarters included an 
outcome or impact component, and around one 
third included a cost-related analysis. 
From this experience, funders looking to 
incorporate evaluation into their investment 
strategy should:
Develop realistic timelines. Evaluation timelines 
in CJII originally ranged from three to five years, 
with most receiving extensions due in large part 
to the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 
pandemic. The timelines also depended on the 
duration and complexity of the program 
intervention, the outcome variables and length of 
time necessary to observe them, and the start-up 
time necessary to solidify program details and/or 
achieve consensus among stakeholder groups (e.g., 
regarding referral processes, provision of data). 
For newer programs, it was typically not possible 
to carry out an outcome evaluation during the 
expected term of the initiative. Even so, conducting 
process/implementation evaluations and 
evaluability assessments was immensely helpful in 
improving their implementation and preparing 
them for outcome evaluations in the future. 
For more established programs, both process and 
outcome evaluations were designed based on the 
specific program structure and population 
served. Yet, most evaluations struggled 
particularly in their outcome and impact 
components; it is undeniably ambitious to 
commit to outcome evaluations concurrent to 
the commencement of implementation funding, 
even if programs are already established. If there 
is any change in population, scale, or service 
approach, as funders typically request as a 
condition of funding, then those changes are 
likely to complicate and extend an outcome 
evaluation timeline. The COVID-19 pandemic 
further exacerbated these challenges, as nearly 
all programs had to adapt in some way to 
continue operating, and evaluations had to 
develop alternative recruitment approaches and 
methodologies.
Plan around data availability. To understand the 
impact of a program, it is common to compare 
participants to a control or comparison group. For 
programs that rely on administrative outcomes, 
that are mandated, or where assignment to groups 
is achieved via clear protocols and/or eligibility 
criteria, this process can be more straightforward. 
But, for voluntary, drop-in programs without a 
clear natural comparison group, the process of 
identifying a comparison group is more 
challenging. If existing programs are 
contemplated as natural comparison groups, 
adequate funding should be allocated to facilitate 
their participation even though they are not 
receiving the targeted “treatment.” 

9
Learning from Data
Funders and evaluators should also consider other 
designs that, although not randomized, still offer 
strong evidence, such as regression discontinuity, 
longitudinal, and propensity score matching de-
signs. For most programs, these research designs 
offer useful results that can be vital in programs’ 
ability to adapt and sustain their work. 
Emphasize participatory approaches. For many 
programs, their prior evaluation experiences have 
been negative and extractive—an obligation that is 
expected of them without their input or advice, 
and an experience that may jeopardize their par-
ticipants. Research teams should instead approach 
and interact with programs as active stakeholders 
in an evaluation and collaboratively develop re-
search designs and tools toward this end.  
Research teams should instead 
approach and interact with 
programs as active stakeholders 
in an evaluation and 
collaboratively develop research 
designs and tools toward this end.
When possible, evaluators should also involve staff 
and participants in data collection, analysis, and 
interpretation. For example, the evaluators at Mt. 
Sinai shared emergent evaluation findings with 
CTI staff to better understand and contextualize 
their analysis. In doing so, they gained key insights 
into how staff-participant relationships worked 
and how participants’ healing journeys were 
shaped by their social contexts. These efforts not 
only increase the potential success of recruitment 
efforts, but they also heighten the relevance of the 
research by drawing on local expertise to collect 
better and more relevant data and understand it in 
ways that evaluators might not consider. 
Be flexible. Community-based programs have their 
participants as their first and foremost priority. In 
real-world settings, programs routinely adapt in 
response to resource changes, emergent issues, 
and/or participant needs. These commitments 
typically outweigh the strict research advantages 
of not adapting a program for the sake of ensuring 
a consistent “treatment” whose impact can be 
studied among a defined set of participants. 
Accordingly, evaluations in community settings 
must be nimble, on-the-ground, and ready for 
program changes. 
For instance, the CTI’s trauma-informed program-
ming rejected standard program paths and allowed 
participants to choose the suite of options that 
best suited them. Rather than not evaluating the 
program, which would have kept hidden the expe-
riences and benefits of those participating in it, the 
evaluation team prioritized adaptability and quick-
ly adjusted in real time by embracing the core 
aspects of the CTI in their recruiting and data 
collection methods. Instead of pre-scheduled inter-
views, the evaluation team worked around partici-
pant schedules and organized focus groups that 
coincided with the end of existing services.
The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic also necessi-
tated modifications to service provision, data 
collection and analysis. For example, in Harlem 
FamilyWorks (HFW), virtual programming was 
initially offered as a method to reduce unnecessary 
social contact but was later retained because re-
mote work improved accessibility to participants. 
Similarly, in the Youth Opportunity Hubs, partici-
pants were provided with laptops to access virtual 
programming to meet their needs during the shut-
down. Among evaluators, the Center for Justice 
Innovation redesigned surveys and interview 
prompts when school closures prohibited research-
ers from directly accessing students in the 
Margaret’s Place in Communities Impacted by 
Trauma-Exposed Youth program, implemented by 
the Joe Torre Safe at Home Foundation.

10
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
Address research ethics directly. In part because of 
the traditional training expected to conduct re-
search, as well as programs’ prior negative experi-
ences, there can often be a large gap between what 
researchers and communities view as ethical. 
Overcoming differences in perspectives requires 
clear and open communication, as well as listening 
from both sides about concerns and implications of 
various research design choices. This includes 
acknowledging potential tensions that may arise 
between differing interpretations of ethics and 
their impacts on data collection and analysis (e.g., 
regarding waivers of consent, random assignment, 
data ownership, topics of study, or dissemination 
of findings). For instance, asking about sensitive 
topics, such as criminal history or income, is not 
inherently problematic or intrusive, but may not be 
used or included in questionaries in meaningful 
ways In the CTI, the evaluator, program, and ISLG 
worked together to about these experiences in 
ways to inform programming and support partici-
pants’ healing journey. This trauma-informed 
approach aligned with the ethics of the program by 
providing participants with the space to share 
their experiences in their own words and in so 
doing, heal from the trauma of incarceration.  
BROADER DATA INFRASTRUCTURE
Thus far, this brief has focused on how individual 
funders, providers, and evaluators can build da-
ta-informed practices. But looking at higher level 
lessons learned throughout CJII, a focus on da-
ta-sharing across the broader social and human 
services landscape—and between providers—is 
warranted. Within organizations, dedicated re-
sources enable programs to build and sustain data 
infrastructures that allow programs to engage in 
research activities that help them understand and 
support their participants. Robust data infrastruc-
ture enables programs to gain a more complete 
picture of participant experiences and outcomes, 
to hire data staff to collect and manage data, and to 
create reports and communicate findings. 
Data infrastructure is also important for examin-
ing impacts that extend beyond organizational and 
agency boundaries. In CJII, many of the initiatives 
sought to link services and support participants 
across multiple domains. Accordingly, many of the 
evaluation designs required multi-agency agree-
ments that were onerous to explore and execute, 
given the siloed nature of most administrative 
datasets. Doing so was feasible but extremely 
labor-intensive within the well-resourced CJII, but 
would be prohibitive for smaller initiatives. 
From this experience, this section outlines recom-
mendations to improve the broader, interconnect-
ed landscape of data infrastructure, research, and 
evaluation in community settings. 
Connect stakeholders’ data. CJII brought together 
many organizations that do not typically share 
data for normal day-to-day operations. For in-
stance, in the Youth Opportunity Hubs evaluation, 
data from five main programs and 61 partner orga-
nizations were connected to longitudinal data 
from a youth outcome survey, administrative 
financial data, and data from an organizational 
network survey. For the College-in-Prison Reentry 
Initiative evaluation, the Vera Institute worked 
with case-level quantitative data on students 
across seven education providers, offering college 
instruction in 17 total facilities across New York, as 
well as data from the New York State Department 
of Corrections and Community Supervision 
(DOCCS) and the Department of Labor. In the 
Health Justice Network (HJN) evaluation, program 
data were linked to external data from the NYC 
Department of Correction (DOC) and DOCCS. 
Furthermore, a comparison of participants to 
non-participants was possible by linking outcomes 
data from the NYS Division of Criminal Justice 
Services (DCJS). These evaluations allowed for 
much more multi-faceted understandings of pro-
gram impact. 

11
Learning from Data
CONSIDERATIONS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR CONDUCTING RESEARCH WITH 
SENSITIVE COMMUNITIES
When conducting research with sensitive communities, researchers, funders, and programs must work to-
gether to ensure that we learn from our experience while maintaining participant agency and upholding 
shared values. A classic example of the gap between what researchers and communities view as ethical is that 
of randomized control trials (RCTs). RCTs test the effectiveness of an intervention (i.e., program, medicine, 
treatment) by randomly assigning participants to different groups and observing the results. 
In randomizing the intervention, researchers can reduce potential bias. Although RCTs are considered the 
“gold standard” in research, they are viewed negatively by a majority of lay people in the U.S. based on the 
widespread societal values of agency and choice. An initial study of the issue first identified a conundrum: 
most people in the U.S. approve of the universal implementation of untested policies and disapprove of ran-
domized experiments to understand the strengths/weakness of different options. A follow-up study by the 
original authors identified randomization of choice–and the inability to opt out of this process—as the driver 
of this disapproval.
Another important research consideration is not only the right of participants to opt out of research—as in 
the case with RCTs—but also their right to opt in. Equity must therefore be considered in determining who 
can participate in and benefit from research. Part of this process should include engaging with guidance pro-
vided by Institutional Review Boards (IRB) that emphasizes the feasibility and the potential impact of re-
search on different populations. Otherwise, there is risk that gatekeepers deny participants their own agency, 
viewing research narrowly as “intrusive” rather than informative and an opportunity for participants to tell 
their own stories. Underlying this tendency is a belief that participants need to be “protected” rather than 
informed and freely able to choose. It has the unintended consequence of erasing traditionally disadvantaged 
groups from research, inadvertently further entrenching existing structures that have historically valued 
more dominant populations and stories. In other words, programs and other stakeholders must also clearly 
consider the impact of research not taking place, such as regarding the unique concerns and approaches in 
their communities. 
Similarly, programs and evaluators working with sensitive data may need to discuss protections such as the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the Family Educational Rights and Privacy 
Act (FERPA) to ensure that participants are protected and that researchers can access necessary data. For pro-
grams that have experienced unethical research activities in the past, stakeholders may reasonably inquire 
about the application of these laws to limit research activities and protect their participants. In such cases, 
clear communication about research exceptions, ethics, expectations, and responsibilities at the onset of 
funding and throughout implementation are paramount to ensuring a smooth experience for all 
stakeholders. 
In cases where programs and evaluators work with youth, in schools, or with medical professionals, funders 
should consult with legal counsel to articulate a clear, practical stance on constraints and expectations early 
in the process, so that research partnerships can proceed with clarity and confidence. It may be helpful to 
frame the discussion in terms of issue convergence—recognizing the shared obligation to protect participant 
data while also allowing participants to benefit and programs to improve and sustain their operations.

12
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
Sharing across agency boundaries also holds the 
potential to benefit participants, as it may reduce 
the need for participants to answer the same ques-
tions repeatedly as part of service delivery. 
Moreover, agencies benefit by having access to 
more information on how their participants re-
ceive services, as well as reducing the need to 
recollect data that is otherwise already available. 
Standardize data agreements. As vital as data 
sharing was to program implementation and eval-
uation, the process of doing so required significant 
investment in time and infrastructure among 
programs, evaluators, data-sharing agencies, and 
CUNY ISLG. Ideally, programs and government 
agencies would use compatible case management 
systems that allow data to be imported and export-
ed seamlessly. These systems would require agree-
ments on how to share and protect such data. 
Even short of this idealistic scenario, however, 
several strategies could facilitate more frequent 
and easier data sharing. Within jurisdictions, 
developing and agreeing to a standardized data 
template would help avoid disagreements over 
whose boilerplate should reign supreme. In some 
CJII evaluations, even agencies housed within the 
same jurisdiction (e.g., City agencies) typically had 
their own templates reflective of their own pro-
cesses and designed to protect their own interests. 
In these cases, it was challenging for the various 
parties to come to agreement on a common data 
template and/or agree to use one agency’s template 
to the exclusion of their own. Similarly, using an 
integrated case management system and standard 
data definitions across city agencies would further 
enhance data sharing, reducing the burden of 
standardizing data post collection.
COMMUNICATION AND 
DISSEMINATION
To promote transparency and knowledge shar-
ing throughout the initiative, CUNY ISLG and 
DANY produced regular reports that summa-
rized overall performance of the initiative and 
how its resources were allocated. In addition, 
CUNY ISLG and DANY made all evaluations 
public and hosted them on the central CJII.org 
site. 
From this approach, we recommend:
Center participant stories. Most CJII evalua-
tions included mixed methods in their designs, 
with focus groups, interviews, observations, and 
program material analysis as common qualita-
tive research activities. These approaches helped 
evaluators triangulate across methods but also 
gave voice to participants rather than relying 
only on survey and administrative data. 
Likewise, in performance reports to CUNY ISLG, 
grantees were asked to share participant stories 
as a way of humanizing their work and impact. 
In turn, these participant stories were often 
featured in reports, briefs, blogs, and other vehi-
cles to communicate the impact and importance 
of the funding to various audiences in a way that 
was authentic and tangible.
Reach people where they are. Final reports are a 
customary deliverable expected of evaluators 
and researchers—but tend to be lengthy and 
jargony. When possible, CUNY ISLG encouraged 
evaluators to move technical details to an ap-
pendix, so that the lay reader could reach the 
findings sooner and without being distracted by 
details unnecessary for their understanding. We 
also typically required a mid-evaluation report 
in addition to a final report, so that programs 
could adjust mid-implementation rather than 
waiting until the end of implementation for 
actionable insight. In addition, funding often 
required an accompanying, spin-off brief for 

13
Learning from Data
practitioners, as well as a presentation or briefing 
of the main findings for stakeholders. 
On CUNY ISLG’s end, we developed one or more 
blogs to accompany each evaluation product to 
highlight key findings and be shared on social 
media. Those can be seen on the CUNY ISLG site. 
We also produced policy briefs, similar to this one, 
throughout the initiative to distill key findings for 
funders, policymakers, and program managers. 
Together, these strategies aimed to reach as many 
audiences as possible. 
These include:
•	
A Blueprint for Social Service Navigation in NYC 
and Beyond
•	
Capacity Building for Community-Based 
Organizations as an Investment in Social Change
Read More CJII 
Insights
This brief is part of ISLG’s series on lessons 
learned from the CJII. In addition to this brief on 
the importance of centering participant and com-
munity voice in program design, implementation, 
and evaluation, this series includes briefs on: 
•	
Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration 
•	
Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and 
Well-Being 
•	
Engaging Hard-to-Reach Populations 
•	
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for 
Individuals with Criminal Legal System 
Involvement 
•	
Centering Participant and Community Voice in 
Program Design, Implementation & Evaluation
To access the evaluations funded through CJII, 
including those referenced in this brief, see the 
CJII website.
The CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance is a good governance think-and-do tank. 
We craft the research, policies, partnerships, and infrastructures necessary to  
help government and public institutions work more effectively, efficiently and equitably.  
For more information, visit islg.cuny.edu.


===== BRIEF 6: Centering Participant and Community Voice in Program Design, Implementation & Evaluation =====

1
Centering Participant and Community Voice in Program Design,Implementation & Evaluation
Building Safer Communities 
Through the Criminal Justice 
Investment Initiative
Centering Participant 
and Community Voice 
in Program Design, 
Implementation & Evaluation
Research & Policy Brief
April 2026

2
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
AUTHOR 
Neal Palmer 
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This brief is the culmination of many important partnerships. 
The District Attorney of New York (DANY) and its staff have 
been instrumental partners in funding and guiding the 
development of Criminal Justice Investment Initiative (CJII) 
since 2015. 
We are grateful to the community organizations who received 
CJII funding and made possible the robust evaluation of their 
programs. Accordingly, we also thank the evaluators for their 
insightful and creative approaches to evaluation, largely during 
and after the hugely disruptive COVID-19 pandemic. In 
addition, we thank the research participants for sharing their 
experiences in the programs.
Finally, we are thankful for our CUNY ISLG colleagues—this 
brief would have been impossible without Siobhán Carney and 
Patrick Hart for their leadership of CJII, and Alisa Orlowsky for 
support in editing and design. 
This brief is part of CUNY ISLG’s series on lessons 
learned from the Criminal Justice Investment Initiative 
to promote community safety.  
 
For other briefs in the series, see here.

3
Centering Participant and Community Voice in Program Design,Implementation & Evaluation
Introduction
In recent years, funders and government agencies have sought to make policymaking more responsive to the 
needs and priorities of the communities they serve. Accordingly, they have worked to transfer decision-mak-
ing and control to community stakeholders. For instance, on his first day in office, former President Biden 
signed Executive Order 13985, Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through 
the Federal Government, directing federal agencies “to improve the quality, frequency, and accessibility of 
their community engagement, and to consult with impacted communities” when developing new funding 
opportunities, budgets, and regulations. Similarly, many private funders have increasingly sought to elevate 
more diverse voices into policymaking and research. These and similar efforts aim to bring together groups 
of people with shared identities, experiences, and interests, or who live in proximity to one another—such as 
neighborhoods or school districts—to help shape the policies and initiatives that most affect them.  
The Institute for State & Local Governance at the City University of New York (CUNY ISLG) works with gov-
ernments, community-based organizations (CBOs), and other public institutions to build their organizational 
capacity through training and technical assistance and fostering meaningful partnerships across the field. In 
2015, CUNY ISLG partnered with the Manhattan’s District Attorney’s Office (DANY) to launch the Criminal 
Justice Investment Initiative (CJII), a $250 million investment in impactful projects designed to improve public 
safety and prompt a fairer, more efficient criminal legal system. CUNY ISLG and DANY developed the initia-
tive’s strategic plan through more than 250 interviews with community members, policymakers, experts, and 
other stakeholders; CUNY ISLG also served as the technical assistance consultant to DANY for CJII and acted 
as grants manager to funded programs and the evaluators who studied program implementation and impact. 
Throughout the initiative, CUNY ISLG, providers, and evaluators infused community and participant voice 
into their program and evaluation designs to improve their responsiveness and impact. 

4
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
Several core principles typically guide the creation 
of community-informed programs and policies. 
These include: diversity and inclusion; intentional 
participation and collaboration; accountability and 
community driven action; transparency and trust; 
resource sharing; sustainability; openness to inno-
vation and continuous learning. The level of com-
munity involvement can fall along a continuum, 
from offering basic input, to providing approval, to 
collaboration and co-leadership, to community 
ownership. Community engagement may take the 
familiar form of advisory boards, or more ongoing 
and in-depth community direction and deci-
sion-making. In addition, this engagement can be 
incorporated into a range of activities common to 
CBOs, including program design, implementation 
and monitoring, and research and evaluation.  
A variety of research and evaluation approaches 
from several disciplines are also commonly uti-
lized in community-engaged work, including com-
munity-based action research (CBAR), communi-
ty-based participatory research (CBPR), communi-
ty-based participatory action research (CBPAR), 
and participatory action research (PAR); more 
general or umbrella approaches including commu-
nity-based research and community-engaged 
methods; and other practices including participa-
tory grantmaking, community consultation, col-
laborative or participatory budgeting, and partici-
patory programming. Collectively, these strategies 
endeavor to increase the community’s role in 
developing and shaping programs; identifying 
necessary improvements to implementation; defin-
ing research agendas, collecting and interpreting 
data; and developing recommendations and action 
steps toward reform.1
1      See Glossary for an explanation of these research 
and evaluation approaches.
This brief explores the commitment to community 
and participant engagement that CUNY ISLG, 
DANY, and CBO partners infused throughout CJII, 
drawing on case studies from four evaluations of 
CJII initiatives: the Center for Trauma Innovation 
(CTI), the Community Navigators Program (CNP), 
the Youth Opportunity Hubs (Hubs or YOH), and 
Foster Youth Transitioning to Adulthood (FYTA) 
programs. The brief details lessons learned and 
recommendations regarding the integration of 
community and participant voices in program 
design, implementation, and evaluation. Moreover, 
it reflects CUNY ISLG’s broader commitment to 
community direction in policymaking and re-
search, as described here. 
The brief details lessons learned 
and recommendations regarding 
the integration of community and 
participant voices in program 
design, implementation, and 
evaluation.
ISLG has published several other briefs in a series 
on lessons learned from the CJII to promote invest 
in communities to promote public safety. For other 
briefs in the series, see here.
Building and Evaluating  
Community-Informed Programs 

5
Centering Participant and Community Voice in Program Design,Implementation & Evaluation
Beginning in 2017, Exodus Transitional Community developed and operated the Center for Trauma 
Innovation (CTI). The CTI served individuals who had experienced chronic trauma related to 
incarceration, poverty, systemic racism, and experiencing or witnessing community violence, 
among other significant stressors. To meaningfully serve these populations, the CTI worked via 
three main prongs: first, participants could access culturally competent, trauma-informed clinical 
and non-clinical healing services. Second, the CTI provided training and technical assistance 
(TTA) to staff in-house as well as to external organizations to enhance their provision of trau-
ma-informed services. Lastly, the CTI developed a Learning Community of organizations seeking 
to innovate and advance trauma-informed care for justice-impacted individuals, families, and 
communities more broadly. 
Through CJII, the Icahn School of Medicine conducted a process and outcome evaluation of the 
development of the CTI. The study used a CBPR framework and included participant interviews 
and focus groups; clinical and non-clinical staff interviews; observations of direct services and 
TTA sessions; analysis of program data; and participant and staff questionnaires. More than 80 
percent of participants who completed an evaluation survey said the CTI had helped them heal 
from past trauma, and more than 90 percent said they were better able to cope with challenges. 
Moreover, those who experienced these benefits were also more likely to report improvements in 
other life domains, including education, employment, mental health, and social relationships. 
CASE STUDY: CENTER FOR TRAUMA INNOVATION (CTI)
CJII Case Studies:  
Community Voices in Action
“Life got in the way many times when I would try to 
start up and stay steady with the program. It always 
felt like—the door’s always open, you just come back to 
it when you can, and the healing is ready to be done.”  
- CTI PROGRAM PARTICIPANT

6
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
The Silberman School of Social Work at Hunter College created the Community 
Navigators Program in 2017 to connect community residents to available services, such 
as mental health support or housing programs, that they did not know about or had 
been unable to access. The program hired and trained a network of Community 
Navigators capable of both identifying individuals in need of services and ensuring that 
they achieved their goals by connecting them to relevant supportive services. Effective 
Navigators were “peers” with participants in that they shared personal characteristics 
and life experiences and came from the same neighborhoods, which enabled them to 
develop trust over time.  
Navigators met participants where they were, adjusting their engagement strategies and 
intensity based on participant needs and capacity. They also developed extensive net-
works of service providers in the community in order to connect participants to the 
most relevant and appropriate supports. To better understand the program’s design and 
implementation, Metis Associates conducted a process evaluation of the program in 
2020-2021. Based on interviews and program data from program stakeholders, partici-
pants, and community partners, the evaluation found that the ability of Navigators to 
connect with participants in a meaningful manner was critical to the success of the 
program. This connection allowed them to better identify needs and build trust that 
facilitated cross-systems referrals. Participants also benefited from the wide range of 
available services Navigators had knowledge of in the community. Moreover, the pro-
gram had a positive impact on the community by creating formal ties between organiza-
tions for more efficient referrals and enabling hand-offs to organizations that were best 
suited to address participants’ specific needs. Finally, the program supported Navigators 
by providing them with extensive training and serving as an entry point for a career in 
the helping professions.  
CASE STUDY: THE COMMUNITY NAVIGATORS PROGRAM (CNP)
“It is a great relationship. We have had very open communication. 
[My navigator] has provided this safe space since the beginning 
where I feel very comfortable telling her exactly what I’m going 
through, what help I need, and why I need it.” 
- CNP PARTICIPANT

7
Centering Participant and Community Voice in Program Design,Implementation & Evaluation
CJII funded the Youth Opportunity Hubs (YOH) initiative to improve safety in four Manhattan 
neighborhoods by enhancing organizational coordination and collaboration among youth service 
providers. When youth service organizations do not effectively work together, youth in need of 
support may fall through the cracks and fail to receive appropriate or effective connections to 
care. Accordingly, the YOH initiative provided dedicated funding for organizational collaboration 
and coordination to five lead youth service organizations located in East Harlem, Central and 
West Harlem, Washington Heights, and the Lower East Side. Each of the lead organizations 
partnered with other organizations to connect youth with a wide range of services across dispa-
rate service systems in their neighborhoods to address their education, employment, prosocial, 
health, criminal legal, and family-related goals and needs. The flexible funding allowed each of 
the five Hubs to develop a tailored partnership model that built on its strengths and addressed 
the unique needs of the youth in their community.  
Westat and Metis Associates conducted a process evaluation, outcome evaluation, and cost anal-
ysis of the YOH Initiative, and found that Hubs were successful in delivering holistic youth 
services because they worked closely across organizational partners to provide youth with tai-
lored, wraparound supports. Hub lead and partner organizations implemented a variety of coor-
dination approaches. Some employed case managers, social workers, and credible messengers to 
work with youth to understand their needs and goals and to connect them to the services avail-
able throughout Hub networks. Credible messengers typically have lived experiences relevant to 
target populations, such as prior juvenile justice system involvement, and work to connect peo-
ple to needed supports and services. Some Hubs co-located staff in partner organizations so that 
youth who had received referrals elsewhere could benefit from a “warm hand-off” to those other 
providers. Finally, all Hubs hosted regular leadership and all-staff meetings to discuss youth 
needs and coordinate services, such as ensuring case coverage and blending service offerings. 
Together, these approaches enabled Hub lead and partner organizations to better communicate 
and collaborate with each other, while also building a robust network of partners with expertise 
in particular services and populations to better support youth.
CASE STUDY: YOUTH OPPORTUNITY HUBS (YOH)  
“[The Hubs Initiative] did bring the best of all of us because it 
allowed us to collaborate and to share resources in a way that we 
hadn’t done before. And ultimately, it made a huge impact in a 
community.”
- NEW YORK-PRESBYTERIAN HOSPITAL PARTNER 

8
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
Young people who have aged out, or who are approaching aging out, of foster care are at 
increased risk of housing instability, unemployment, mental health challenges, and legal 
system involvement as they often are without permanent living arrangements once they 
transition out of care. Yet, it is often difficult to engage foster youth during this period 
because of the scale of the transition to adulthood coupled with the instability they have 
faced in life. To address these issues, the Foster Youth Transitioning to Adulthood (FYTA) 
Initiative funded two programs to provide tailored services for these young people: 
Graham Windham’s Support Lead Achieve Model (SLAM) and The Door’s Manhattan 
Academy Plus (MAP) program. Graham SLAM offered intensive coaching to young people 
to connect them to educational and employment supports and ultimately help them 
build a long-term plan toward living-wage careers. The Door’s MAP program offered 
young people connections to several services related to education, housing, career, and 
mental health counseling.  
Action Research evaluated Graham SLAM, The Door’s MAP program, and The Door’s 
Bronx Academy (BA), on which MAP was modeled. The evaluation included process and 
outcome components, with data sources including interviews with program staff and 
young people in the programs, a review of quarterly reports, and program data. The 
outcome component drew from a first-of-its-kind comprehensive dataset connecting data 
from multiple New York administrative data sources, including the Administration for 
Children’s Service, Human Resources Administration, Department of Homeless Services, 
Department of Corrections, and the New York State Department of Labor. The evaluation 
found that almost all participants had experienced substantiated instances of maltreat-
ment as children. Yet, because of the FYTA investment as well as others around the same 
time, very few program participants had involvement with the criminal legal system and 
shelter system following program engagement.
CASE STUDY: GRAHAM SLAM AND THE DOOR’S MAP PROGRAM 
“A lot of times, [for] foster youth or justice-involved 
youth...knowing that they have a dedicated program 
or space just for them where everybody around 
knows the feeling of what they went through, I think 
it allows them to open up and see the possibilities.”  
- GRAHAM SLAM STAFF MEMBER 

9
Centering Participant and Community Voice in Program Design,Implementation & Evaluation
LESSON 1: STAFF WITH LIVED 
EXPERIENCE ARE FOUNDATIONAL TO 
BUILDING TRUST, CULTURAL 
COMPETENCY, AND DEEP 
ENGAGEMENT.
Recruiting and investing in staff members who 
share life experiences with participants—especial-
ly those who have navigated the criminal legal or 
social service systems—helps staff build relation-
ships and trust with clients that professional 
credentials alone cannot achieve. This peer con-
nection allows participants to feel seen, under-
stood, and safe enough to share and process their 
life experiences and articulate a forward-looking 
vision for their lives.  
The Living Redemption Youth Opportunity Hub 
(YOH) in Central/West Harlem incorporated 
Credible Messengers, who were perceived as in-
creasing participant comfort due to their ability to 
“make credible the role of the therapist, the role of 
the tutor, the role of the arts organization, the role 
of the coach, the role of the mentor.” For the 
Community Navigators Program (CNP), peer navi-
gators were hired from the East Harlem communi-
ty to build relationships centered on trust, devel-
oped through shared age, race, gender, family 
characteristics, educational background, residen-
tial history, language, gender identity, and other 
characteristics and experiences. The peer model 
was cited as the primary reason Navigators could 
truly understand participants’ needs, enabling 
them to be perceived as “real people” with strug-
gles, rather than just extensions of a service pro-
vider. One Navigator shared: “When you open 
yourself and just be real and human, people 
Lessons Learned: Participant and 
Community Voices in Programming, 
Policymaking, and Research 
connect to you better. It’s so much easier to work 
with that person because they’re willing to tell you 
[what they need and the barriers they are facing].”  
“When you open yourself and just 
be real and human, people connect 
to you better. It’s so much easier 
to work with that person because 
they’re willing to tell you [what 
they need and the barriers they 
are facing].”  
Similarly, at the Center for Trauma Innovation 
(CTI), where two-thirds of staff had been jus-
tice-impacted, staff legitimacy stemmed from their 
shared lived histories with participants. As one 
participant attested, “I felt more comfortable with 
CTI and Exodus, you know, being around people 
that [have] been through what I’ve been through. 
So it’s a relief, a pressure alleviated that I know 
with somebody that has been through what I’ve 
been through and they want to help, and it’s a lot 
when somebody has been where you’ve been 
through or probably is where you’re at and still 
reaching out that hand, you feel me? Saying ‘if you 
need that help, come get that help. Come get it 
from me. Come get it from us.’” This peer dynamic 
created a powerful sense of belonging and hope. 
LESSON 2: CONTINUOUS LEARNING 
AND ADAPTABILITY HELP ADDRESS 
PARTICIPANTS’ REAL-TIME NEEDS.
Effective client-centered programs incorporate 
continuous learning through ongoing data 

10
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
collection and analysis, from participants and 
staff, to adapt services and meet evolving prefer-
ences and needs. Formal data collection and review 
processes and structures within these organiza-
tions help them monitor their work systematically, 
facilitating flexibility rather than rigid, one-size-
fits-all approaches. At the CTI, direct service offer-
ings evolved over time to better align with partici-
pant feedback and needs, including a greater focus 
on housing support and job training. CTI staff 
articulated the foundational importance of listen-
ing: “You gotta listen to your community. You gotta 
get out and find out what’s in their needs... not 
what you think their needs are, but what their 
needs [actually] are.”  
“You gotta listen to your 
community. You gotta get out and 
find out what’s in their needs... 
not what you think their needs 
are, but what their needs 
[actually] are.”  
The Community Navigators Program learned that 
simply having an open physical space for self-re-
ferrals did not increase program enrollment as 
initially expected; rather, regular review of admin-
istrative data and Navigator input led to the cre-
ation of more effective outreach strategies such as 
co-locating Navigators within other community 
organizations.  
During the COVID-19 pandemic, both the FYTA 
initiative and the Youth Opportunity Hubs recog-
nized the urgency of immediate, basic needs. Hubs 
swiftly created virtual service options, distributed 
technology, and provided emergency basic resourc-
es based on emergent needs voiced by youth partic-
ipants. Similarly, FYTA coaches created flexible 
virtual services and workshops aimed at meeting 
concrete and immediate needs. A staff member at 
Graham SLAM highlighted the value of 
adaptability during crisis: “Our engagement has 
increased a lot because we were able to get their 
feedback on what has been most challenging for 
them in the pandemic. Mental health was one. So, 
we have a workshop...30-minute sessions of us just 
talking about, ‘How was your week? Was your 
week bad? Why was it bad?’...Now I think it’s bet-
ter. They’re handling it better.” 
LESSON 3: CHOICE, COLLABORATION, 
AND SHARED GOAL-SETTING FOSTER 
PARTICIPANT AGENCY AND LONG-
TERM SUCCESS.
Programs that intentionally structure interactions 
to allow participants to guide their own journeys 
reinforce empowerment and self-determination. In 
contrast, rigid adherence to program models or 
predetermined goals increases the risk of mistrust 
and disengagement, especially for individuals 
navigating complex life circumstances like hous-
ing instability, legal obligations, or unemployment. 
Community-grounded programs should plan for 
and embrace intermittent service use and partici-
pant-driven engagement.  

11
Centering Participant and Community Voice in Program Design,Implementation & Evaluation
For instance, the CTI explicitly allowed partici-
pants to “exit/re-enter treatment modalities with-
out complications” based on the understanding 
that personal circumstances were unpredictable 
and participants knew best how to handle their 
various life demands. In response, CTI partici-
pants reported overwhelming endorsement of the 
program’s model, with 98 percent agreeing that CTI 
offered services that fit their needs. A CTI partici-
pant shared the value of the non-coercive ap-
proach: “It doesn’t feel like therapy. It doesn’t feel 
like I’m in a program per se… It doesn’t feel like I’m 
being told what to do.” Another said: “I don’t think 
if I ever come to anybody with any suggestion, it 
will fall on deaf ears.”  
“I don’t think if I ever come to 
anybody with any suggestion, it 
will fall on deaf ears.”  
Similarly, the Youth Opportunity Hubs imple-
mented a “youth-directed” approach where youth 
voice determined goal setting, service plans, and 
even the assignment of advocates. A YOH staff 
member reflected on the necessity of this ap-
proach: “Everything that you do has to be molded 
around them making a decision…Not just making 
decisions because you think it’ll be best for them, 
but based on what they’re telling you, too.” Another 
echoed: “We also had to include the young people 
in the decision-making for what their immediate 
needs are. [In their individual success plans] 
they’re able to contribute to what they believe they 
should work on, what they want to work on…so 
they can feel the value. They can buy into what we 
offer.”  
In addition, the CNP model centered on coaching 
and accompaniment, aiming not just to connect 
participants to services but also to build partici-
pants’ capacity for self-advocacy. Navigators 
viewed their role as teaching participants “how to 
speak up for themselves... That’s the point of the 
program.” Finally, FYTA coaches were explicitly 
encouraged to review their operations to ensure 
youth had the opportunity to shape their relation-
ship with their coaches and had an active voice in 
their engagement.
LESSON 4: EQUITABLE OUTCOMES 
REQUIRE ACTIVELY ENGAGING 
PARTICIPANTS’ INTERSECTIONAL 
IDENTITIES
Program models sometimes fail to account for how 
structural racism, cultural stigmas, gender roles, 
and other societal structures and systems impact 
service uptake and trajectories. To achieve equitable 
outcomes, programs must tailor interventions to 
address the unique needs and experiences of diverse 
participants, moving beyond general care principles 
and adapting approaches to specific populations.  
For instance, CTI data showed that although men 
reported quicker healing journeys, women experi-
enced significantly greater healing with extended 
participation. The CTI also worked to reframe 
mental health support to overcome cultural stigma 
among some of its focus populations, adapting 
interventions to participants’ lives and cultural 
contexts. One CTI participant explained the chal-
lenge of overcoming cultural barriers to therapy: 
“Because I’m from the West Indies, we are not into 
counseling. We were not allowed to speak outside of 
our household. What went on in the household 
stayed in the household. So with me sitting down 
with him to talk about my business, I was not into 
that. And he knew that. But, he worked around it 
and found a way to help my family, and through 
them, he reached me.”  
“Because I’m from the West 
Indies, we are not into 
counseling. ... But, he worked 
around it and found a way to 
help my family, and through 
them, he reached me.”  

12
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
In the Youth Opportunity Hubs, successful service 
delivery was strongly associated with staff sensi-
tivity to cultural/ethnic background and gender 
identity: 75 percent of surveyed participants said 
that Hubs staff were sensitive to participants’ 
cultural/ethnic backgrounds, and 74 percent to 
gender identity. Additional analyses demonstrated 
significant associations between staff cultural/
ethnic sensitivity and improved youth outcomes, 
including returning to school, staying in school, 
enrolling in vocational training, better relation-
ships, and self-reliance. In addition, the CNP de-
signed population-specific trainings for Navigators 
to improve their knowledge of the resources avail-
able to specific communities, such as interpreta-
tion services for families facing language-related 
barriers.
LESSON 5: GIVING PARTICIPANTS THE 
TOOLS TO NAVIGATE EXTERNAL 
SYSTEMS IS ESSENTIAL FOR TRUST 
AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY.
Participants often enter programs with profound 
distrust of large institutions and systems due to 
negative past experiences. Although providing 
referrals may address immediate needs, deeper 
engagement is necessary to empower individuals 
to successfully navigate complex systems inde-
pendently after program exit. Programs demon-
strated that coaching, rather than transactional 
service delivery, was essential to supporting par-
ticipant confidence and ability to advocate for 
themselves.  
For CNP, high referral utilization rates masked the 
fact that participants often still lacked the funda-
mental knowledge of how the referrals were 
sourced or managed, revealing a gap in preparation 
for independence. One CNP Navigator described 
the necessity of coaching with a participant: “Do 
you know that you have to get a person’s name? Do 
you know that you get a ticket number? Do you 
know how to follow up? Do you know that [becom-
ing angry] is not going to get you anywhere, that 
you have to have a different tactic?” YOH staff also 
recognized failures of other systems in youths’ 
lives and sought to develop trusting, non-judgmen-
tal relationships that affirmed their strengths. A 
Living Redemption Hub staff member stated: “The 
reason why the process is so long is because so 
many programs and so many people victimize 
these [youth]. So, they trust no one. They don’t 
even trust themselves to make the right decision.” 
YOH staff ensured participants understood their 
rights and strategies for advocating within sys-
tems. One YOH staff member explained the pro-
cess of moving youth toward self-sufficiency: 
“Youth are learning how to ask for help—I think 
that it made a positive impact on them, on how 
they speak to and how they present themselves in 
front of adults, and most importantly, how they 
open up to say they need help, they need resources, 
‘I want to do this, but I don’t know how.’”
“Youth are learning how to ask 
for help—I think that it made a 
positive impact on them, on how 
they speak to and how they 
present themselves in front of 
adults, and most importantly, 
how they open up to say they 
need help, they need resources, ‘I 
want to do this, but I don’t know 
how.’”

13
Centering Participant and Community Voice in Program Design,Implementation & Evaluation
LESSON 6: PARTICIPATORY DATA COLLECTION AND RESEARCH DESIGNS 
INCREASE VALIDITY, ACTIONABILITY, AND RELEVANCE. 
Traditional, lengthy, and in-person data collection instruments can prove ineffective for populations strug-
gling to meet immediate needs, populations with unpredictable schedules, and populations with mistrust 
and prior negative experiences with institutions. In contrast, participatory approaches like communi-
ty-based participatory research (CBPR) increase the odds that monitoring and evaluation approaches—and 
the interpretation of data—reflect the realities, priorities, and voices of those most impacted by a program, 
and therefore directly inform programmatic improvements.  
The CTI evaluation team successfully implemented a CBPR framework that emphasized collaboration with 
staff and participants throughout all phases, from tool development to interpretation. This approach enabled 
the evaluation team to prioritize reflexive knowledge sharing, ensuring that data-driven insights were con-
textualized with the lived experiences and day-to-day realities of CTI staff and leadership.  
For instance, initial CTI data suggested disparities in service utilization, but collaborative discussions re-
vealed underlying systemic factors shaping these trends, allowing stakeholders to co-develop strategies to 
address them. Likewise, initial plans for group data collection failed due to low engagement; responding to 
feedback that participants preferred integration into existing schedules, the evaluation team adapted its 
approach to coincide data collection with the end of services. Similarly, collaborative discussions revealed 
that traditional healing measures, such as lengthy multi-item scales, were ineffective given challenges relat-
ed to relevance, comprehension, and integration with crisis management. CTI dramatically increased feed-
back participation rates by shifting to virtual, short, user-friendly surveys coupled with small but meaning-
ful financial incentives. They also consciously avoided traditional trauma measures that could be perceived 
as re-traumatizing. And in the Hubs, the evaluation team convened youth advisors from each Hub to identify 
key areas of interest for the evaluation, which were incorporated into the evaluation design.  

14
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
Recommendations for Centering 
Community Voice and Agency
Based on the lessons learned throughout CJII outlined above, the following recommendations can be used 
by policymakers, CBO leaders, line staff, and researchers to guide future programs and evaluations.
RECOMMENDATION 1: ADOPT FLEXIBLE, LOW-BARRIER, HYBRID SERVICE 
DELIVERY MODELS (VIRTUAL AND IN-PERSON) AS STANDARD FEATURES OF 
PROGRAM DESIGN.
Rigid adherence to traditional, in-person meeting schedules poses systemic barriers for vulnerable popula-
tions managing employment conflicts, caregiving duties, housing instability, or transportation issues. 
Hybrid and mobile models enhance accessibility, allowing participants to engage at the pace and place best 
suited to their needs. The shift to remote and virtual options during the COVID-19 pandemic proved highly 
effective and necessary for accessibility for many FYTA, Hubs, and CTI participants, especially those with 
mobility limitations or caregiving responsibilities. 
RECOMMENDATION 2: ALLOCATE UNRESTRICTED, FLEXIBLE FUNDING STREAMS 
THAT PRIORITIZE INVESTMENTS IN PHYSICAL SPACES AND ADAPTIVE 
PROGRAMMING OVER NARROW OUTPUTS. 
Program effectiveness relies heavily on the flexibility to address complex, multi-layered needs (such as hous-
ing and employment) and the ability to adapt quickly to crises. Funding streams should also support physi-
cal capital improvements that create inviting, participant-directed “safe spaces,” which are foundational to 
engagement and trust-building. FYTA staff observed that having a dedicated space where everyone under-
stood the feeling of what youth went through–coming from foster care or justice system involvement—al-
lowed them to see new possibilities for their lives. Moreover, funding flexibility (such as in the Hubs 
Initiative) allowed programs to revise services and subcontractors in response to evolving, real-time com-
munity needs, as well as to invest in spaces where participants wanted to spend time and build community.
RECOMMENDATION 3: BUILD “SYSTEM LITERACY” AND SELF-ADVOCACY SKILLS 
THROUGH PROCESSES THAT ENCOURAGE PARTICIPANTS TO CO-CREATE THEIR 
INDIVIDUAL SERVICE PLANS AND EXERCISE GENUINE CHOICE IN THEIR 
ENGAGEMENT.
True program success hinges on fostering participants’ ability to navigate complex social service systems 
independently after program exit. The success of the YOH youth-directed model and the principles guiding 
FYTA emphasized that giving youth choice and ownership over their goals increased buy-in, fostered em-
powerment, and promoted self-advocacy. Likewise, the CNP recommended increasing transparency and 
involvement of participants during the process of researching and identifying potential referrals to increase 
their ability to navigate social services independently after program exit.

15
Centering Participant and Community Voice in Program Design,Implementation & Evaluation
RECOMMENDATION 4: ESTABLISH FORMAL SYSTEMS FOR INTEGRATING STAFF 
WITH DIRECT LIVED EXPERIENCE INTO ALL LEVELS OF SERVICE DELIVERY AND 
LEADERSHIP. INVEST IN ROBUST PROFESSIONALIZATION PATHWAYS FOR THESE 
ROLES. 
Unaddressed mental health challenges resulting from complex trauma are primary barriers to achieving 
structural goals (e.g., housing stability, employment). Yet, many people have no access to helping profession-
als, and when they do, they often encounter people who do not understand their experiences. Programs 
should actively recruit clinicians who “look like” and “sound like” participants and provide services in cul-
turally affirming ways to overcome stigma and build trust. With this foundation, programs should also 
establish structured pathways, such as peer specialist roles, for staff with lived experiences that are also 
reflected among participants. These pathways should include specialized training, supervision, and oppor-
tunities for career advancement to maximize their impact and reduce staff burnout. Peer-led models were 
consistently identified as foundational to success across CTI, CNP, and the Hubs, fostering the deep trust 
and relatability necessary for participants to engage in healing and supportive services more broadly.
RECOMMENDATION 5: INVEST IN THE COMMUNITY THROUGH FAIR 
COMPENSATION, STAFF WELLNESS, REASONABLE CASELOAD LIMITS, AND 
COMPREHENSIVE TRAINING. 
The high demands of trauma-focused work contribute to staff burnout, threatening the sustainability and 
quality of care provided. At the same time, staff in these roles are often underpaid and overworked, and given 
insufficient time and resources to process the demands of their roles. The CTI recommended implementing 
structured clinical supervision and trauma-informed debriefing sessions, expanding professional develop-
ment, and reducing burnout by implementing reasonable caseload limits. Stakeholders at the Hubs stressed 
the importance of organizations investing in “respite and renewal” for staff who absorb participants’ trauma.

16
CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance —————— Criminal Justice Investment Initiative
RECOMMENDATION 6: MINIMIZE PARTICIPANT BURDEN BY ABANDONING  
TRADITIONAL, HIGH-DEMAND DATA COLLECTION METHODS IN FAVOR OF CO-
DESIGNED, CREATIVE, LOW-BARRIER, AND INCENTIVE-BASED ALTERNATIVES. 
The complexity of daily life, competing demands, and deep-seated mistrust of institutions among jus-
tice-impacted and vulnerable populations (such as CTI participants and FYTA youth) can lead to low re-
sponse rates and significant sampling bias when using traditional research methods. To increase engage-
ment and ensure findings are representative and relevant, researchers should consider co-designed, shorter, 
user-friendly instruments; offer flexible modalities (e.g., verbal interviews, mobile formats); and provide 
meaningful incentives. Co-design also encourages more holistic and valid understanding of participant 
journeys, including those that do not follow linear paths or predetermined clinical outcomes.
RECOMMENDATION 7: EMPLOY REFLEXIVE KNOWLEDGE-SHARING THROUGHOUT 
ALL PHASES OF THE RESEARCH CYCLE. 
Integrating continuous dialogue and feedback loops with staff and participants allows for real-time learning 
and empowers staff and participants to take ownership of programmatic changes. Evaluations of trauma-in-
formed programs like the CTI demonstrated that collaborative review of program and evaluation data were 
essential to making real-time adjustments to programming. In addition, the CNP incorporated weekly case 
reviews to identify emergent issues and gaps in program delivery, as well as to support Navigators’ ongoing 
training and professional development.
Read More CJII Insights
This brief is part of ISLG’s series on lessons learned from the CJII. In addition to this brief on the impor-
tance of centering participant and community voice in program design, implementation, and evaluation, 
this series includes briefs on: 
•	
Strengthening Cross-System Collaboration 
•	
Addressing Trauma to Promote Healing and Well-Being 
•	
Engaging Hard-to-Reach Populations 
•	
Meeting Needs and Creating Opportunities for Individuals with Criminal Legal System Involvement 
•	
Learning from Data to Create Stronger Services
To access the evaluations funded through CJII, including those referenced in this brief, see the CJII website.

17
Centering Participant and Community Voice in Program Design,Implementation & Evaluation
Glossary
The CUNY Institute for State & Local Governance is a good governance think-and-do tank. 
We craft the research, policies, partnerships, and infrastructures necessary to  
help government and public institutions work more effectively, efficiently and equitably.  
For more information, visit islg.cuny.edu.
Researchers, evaluators, and other partners can draw from an array of different approaches that are rooted 
in a similar but distinct commitment to collaboration, power-sharing, and centering community expertise. 
Some used by CJII collaborators include:
•	
Community-based action research (CBAR) uses community-informed methods to generate grounded insights 
and more effective, community-driven solutions.
•	
Community-based participatory research (CBPR) is a collaborative approach that engages community mem-
bers, researchers, and funders in shared decision-making, and it aims to disseminate knowledge across 
multiple channels to achieve common goals. 
•	
Community-based participatory action research (CBPAR) is a collaborative research framework where all 
stakeholders are involved throughout the research process, fundamentally reshaping traditional researcher–
participant roles. It begins with a community-identified issue to support and strengthen practical solutions.
•	
Participatory Action Research (PAR) is a research approach that centers experiential knowledge and commu-
nities directly affected by disparities to investigate and challenge unequal social systems through systematic 
inquiry linked to action.
•	
Community-based research and community-engaged methods or community consultation intentionally 
involves community members as partners in the research process, requiring researchers and institutions to 
share power and decision-making to create more inclusive and collaborative outcomes for the community. 
•	
Participatory grantmaking is an approach to philanthropy that shares decision-making power with commu-
nity members, enabling those most affected by funding decisions to help set priorities and allocate resources 
more responsively to community needs.
•	
Collaborative or participatory budgeting is a democratic process that gives community members direct 
power to decide how a portion of a public or organizational budget is spent, ensuring funding decisions 
reflect community priorities and needs.
