===== SOURCE: landing page =====
Innovative Ideas. Independent Policy.
•
Home
•
About
•
Research
•
Events
•
Press
•
Impact
•
Support
•
Contact
Report
- September 2026
5 Ideas for Reducing Bureaucratic Barriers in NYC
This report offers five concrete ideas to reduce bureaucratic hurdles that slow government down, increase costs, and make it harder to get things done in New York.
by Jonathan Bowles and Eli Dvorkin
Tags:
infrastructure
affordable housing
energy
city hall
• Read the full report and five ideas here.
M ayor Mamdani's Commission on Government Efficiency (COGE) has advanced five promising ballot proposals to make city government work more efficiently. But there are numerous other opportunities to eliminate unnecessary bureaucratic hurdles that slow government down, increase costs, and make it harder to get things done in New York, many of which do not require charter changes. Reducing these frustrating, costly, and time-consuming bureaucratic rules and processes will be critical in the coming months and years as New York works to tackle serious affordability and competitiveness challenges amid growing fiscal constraints.
In researching this report, the Center for an Urban Future heard about dozens of specific rules, regulations, and processes that add significant time and cost to projects large and small or make getting things done virtually impossible. These barriers contribute to the city’s sky-high housing costs, squeeze already narrow margins for small businesses and vendors, slow infrastructure projects that help prepare the city for climate change, and even contribute to staff vacancies across government. They force nonprofits to hire extra staff to navigate duplicative contracting and reporting requirements, prompt BIDs and community groups to abandon plans for block parties and other public realm events, and drive up the cost of seemingly straightforward projects, like building a park bathroom or renovating a branch library.
This report shines a light on five especially maddening bureaucratic barriers that have not yet been addressed.
These hurdles across city government get in the way of progress in New York and are ripe for reform.
The five ideas include:
• Revise the city’s plumbing code to allow greater use of PVC piping, bringing New York City in line with the rest of the country.
• Stop the city’s Office of Management and Budget from re-underwriting every affordable housing project.
• Clear the approval bottlenecks holding back battery energy storage from strengthening the grid.
• Eliminate civil service restrictions that make it difficult for the city to hire people with the most in-demand technology skills.
• Make joint bidding permanent to cut delays and costs on city infrastructure projects.
Read the full report and all five ideas here.
This is the latest in a series of policy reports outlining concrete ideas to keep New York City competitive amid growing fiscal and economic challenges. It follows our February 2026 report, 5 Revenue-Raising Ideas for NYC .
The series was produced in partnership with, and with support from, Winston C. Fisher and Fisher Brothers Foundation.
5 Ideas for Reducing Bureaucratic Barriers in NYC is a publication of the Center for an Urban Future. Researched and written by Jonathan Bowles and Eli Dvorkin. Additional research by Gabriel Landrein Buendia, Nora Lewis, Charlotte Sadelain, and Yona Litwin. Edited by Jonathan Bowles and Eli Dvorkin. Designed by Sarah Tan.
Center for an Urban Future (CUF) is a leading think tank focused on building a stronger and more equitable economy in New York City, and expanding economic opportunity for all New Yorkers.
This report was made possible thanks to the Fisher Brothers Foundation and Winston C. Fisher . General operating support for the Center for an Urban Future has been provided by The Clark Foundation , Robin Hood , and the Altman Foundation .
Related Press
Do Buildings Need Cast-Iron Pipes, or Would Plastic Do?
The New York Times ,
by James Barron,
September 17, 2026
This report was made possible thanks to the Fisher Brothers Foundation and Winston C. Fisher .
Related Publications
7639|7619
•
5 Revenue-Raising Ideas for NYC
•
15 Policy Ideas for NYC to Start 2026
Related Events
•
Ideas for Cutting Bureaucratic Hurdles and Getting Things Done in NYC
Related Press
Do Buildings Need Cast-Iron Pipes, or Would Plastic Do?
The New York Times
View More Related Press
Related Press
Do Buildings Need Cast-Iron Pipes, or Would Plastic Do?
The New York Times
We're Hiring
Managing Editor
Search
@nycfuture
Follow @nycfuture
CUF in the News
Changing Careers: New York City Expands Free College Tuition Program for Adults
Forum Daily New York
Mayor Zohran Mamdani doubles individual artist grants in New York City to $10,000
Artsy
New York expands free SUNY and CUNY tuition to those with college degrees
News 10 ABC
Should AI Be Regulated City by City? New York Should Think Carefully Before Answering
AlleyWatch
New York’s retail storefront strategy: cut it in half
The Real Deal
Mamdani Doubles Grants for NYC Artists
Hyperallergic
Cost of retirement on Long Island squeezing seniors, forcing them to cut back
Newsday
View More Press
•
© All Rights Reserved.
Content
• Reports • Commentary/Op-Ed • Testimony • Data • Events • Impact
Topics
• Economic Growth • Economic Opportunity • Entrepreneurship • Immigrants • Boroughs • Small Business • Human Capital • Higher Education • Creative Economy • Tech
Follow
Support
• Internships
• Support the Center
• Contact
Center for an
Urban Future
80 Eighth Avenue, Suite 704
New York, NY 10011
212-479-3344
[email protected]
© All Rights Reserved.
x

===== SOURCE: report PDF =====
5
Ideas for Reducing 
Bureaucratic  
Barriers  
in NYC
SEPTEMBER 2026
5 Ideas for Reducing Bureaucratic Barriers 
in NYC is a publication of the Center for an 
Urban Future.
Researched and written by Jonathan Bowles 
and Eli Dvorkin. Additional research by Gabriel 
Landrein Buendia, Nora Lewis, Charlotte
Sadelain, and Yona Litwin. Edited by Jonathan 
Bowles and Eli Dvorkin. Designed by Sarah 
Tan.
Center for an Urban Future (CUF) is a leading 
think tank focused on building a stronger  
and more equitable economy in New York City, 
and expanding economic opportunity for all 
New Yorkers.
This report was produced in partnership with, 
and with support from, the Fisher Brothers 
Foundation and Winston C. Fisher. General 
operating support for the Center for an Urban 
Future has been provided by The Clark 
Foundation, Robin Hood, and  
the Altman Foundation. 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Jonathan Bowles
EDITORIAL & POLICY DIRECTOR
Eli Dvorkin
CHIEF OF STAFF
Stephanie Arevalo
SENIOR DATA & POLICY RESEARCHER
Rachel Neches 
POLICY RESEARCHER
Alejandra Díaz-Pizarro
RESEARCH AND OPERATIONS ASSOCIATE
Sophia Tumolo
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Gifford Miller (Chairman)
Jonathan Bowles
Rafael E. Cestero
Russell Dubner
Garnesha Ezediaro
Susan Fine
Kyle Kimball
Katy Knight
Jessie Lazarus
David Lebenstein
Eric S. Lee 
Josh Moskowitz
Monisha Nariani
Max Neukirchen
Andrew Reicher 
Peter Schubert
John Siegal
Thomas Vecchione
Sherry Wang
Kate Wittels
5 Ideas for Reducing 
Bureaucratic Barriers in NYC
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
1.   Revise the city’s plumbing code to allow greater use  
of PVC piping, bringing New York City in line with the  
rest of the country.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
2.   Stop OMB from re-underwriting every affordable  
housing project.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
3.   Clear the approval bottlenecks holding back  
battery storage.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
4.   Eliminate civil service restrictions that make it  
difficult for the city to hire people with the most  
in-demand technology skills.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
5.   Make joint bidding permanent to cut delays and  
costs on city infrastructure projects. . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
 
1
MAYOR MAMDANI’S COMMISSION ON GOVERNMENT 
EFFICIENCY (COGE) has advanced five promising ballot 
proposals to make city government work more efficiently. 
But there are numerous other opportunities to eliminate 
unnecessary bureaucratic hurdles that slow government 
down, increase costs, and make it harder to get things 
done in New York, many of which do not require charter 
changes. Reducing these frustrating, costly, and time-
consuming bureaucratic rules and processes will be critical 
in the coming months and years as New York works to 
tackle serious affordability and competitiveness challenges 
amid growing fiscal constraints.
In researching this report, the Center for an Urban 
Future heard about dozens of specific rules, regulations, 
and processes that add significant time and cost to 
projects large and small or make getting things done 
virtually impossible. These barriers contribute to the city’s 
sky-high housing costs, squeeze already narrow margins 
for small businesses and vendors, slow infrastructure 
projects that help prepare the city for climate change, and 
even contribute to staff vacancies across government. 
They force nonprofits to hire extra staff to navigate 
duplicative contracting and reporting requirements, 
prompt BIDs and community groups to abandon plans 
for block parties and other public realm events, and drive 
up the cost of seemingly straightforward projects, like 
building a park bathroom or renovating a branch library. 
This report shines a light on five especially maddening 
bureaucratic barriers that have not yet been addressed. 
These hurdles across city government get in the way of 
progress in New York and are ripe for reform. The five 
ideas include: 
1.  Revise the city’s plumbing code to allow 
greater use of PVC piping, bringing New York 
City in line with the rest of the country.
2.  Stop the city’s Office of Management and 
Budget from re-underwriting every affordable 
housing project.
3.  Clear the approval bottlenecks holding back 
battery energy storage from strengthening 
the grid.
4.  Eliminate civil service restrictions that make 
it difficult for the city to hire people with the 
most in-demand technology skills.
5.  Make joint bidding permanent to cut delays 
and costs on city infrastructure projects.
This is the latest in a series of policy reports outlining 
concrete ideas to keep New York City competitive amid 
growing fiscal and economic challenges. It follows our 
February 2026 report, 5 Revenue-Raising Ideas for NYC.
The series was produced in partnership with, 
and with support from, Winston C. Fisher and Fisher 
Brothers Foundation. 
1
Introduction
2
5 IDEAS FOR REDUCING BUREAUCRATIC BARRIERS IN NYC
1
NEW YORKERS FACE SOME OF THE HIGHEST HOUSING costs in 
the nation in part because it is extraordinarily expensive 
to build housing in the city. While there is a long list of 
things that add to the expense of building here—from 
land costs to labor and materials—the city’s onerous 
regulatory requirements contribute to the challenge. One 
of the best opportunities to simplify these requirements 
and reduce the cost of building is to bring New York in 
line with nearly every other city across the country and 
allow the use of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) piping in the 
construction of multi-family residential buildings. 
PVC is lightweight, durable, resistant to corrosion, 
and significantly less expensive than traditional cast iron 
piping. Because it is a lot lighter and easier to transport and 
install than metal piping, the use of PVC can significantly 
reduce both material and labor costs. But in New York 
City, PVC piping is still sharply restricted by the city’s 
Plumbing Code. 
Across the city, PVC is generally limited to sanitary 
drainage—the network that carries wastewater from 
toilets, sinks, showers, and dishwashers out of buildings. 
Even for sanitary drainage, PVC can only be used in 
residential buildings of five stories or less. As a result, 
most multifamily buildings must rely on more expensive 
materials, including cast iron pipes.
New York City did loosen its plumbing code in 2022 to 
allow PVC piping in residential buildings up to five stories 
tall (the previous limit was three stories). But New York 
is still an outlier, imposing restrictions that are far more 
stringent than nearly every other U.S. city and every other 
city in the state. 
Most large U.S. cities follow the International 
Plumbing Code (IPC) or Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC), 
which allow PVC piping more broadly, subject to modern 
fire protection requirements rather than blanket height 
restrictions. Cities such as Los Angeles, Seattle, Houston, 
Denver, and many others do not impose a height restriction 
comparable to New York’s.
Even among cities that limit the use of plastic piping, 
New York City remains among the most restrictive. 
Washington, DC does not impose a special local height 
limit comparable to New York City’s five-story rule; instead, 
it relies on fire protection measures such as firestopping 
requirements and rated assemblies. Boston allows PVC in 
residential buildings up to 10 stories. Philadelphia has a 
slightly higher threshold than New York (allowing PVC 
in residential buildings of 75 feet or less), while Chicago 
is roughly in line with New York (with a 60-foot building 
limit for PVC).
Outside New York City, there is no comparable 
statewide restriction. Municipalities including New 
Rochelle, White Plains, Albany, Buffalo, Rochester, 
Syracuse, and Yonkers generally follow the New York 
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, which 
recognizes PVC as an approved material for sanitary 
drainage and vent systems without New York City’s five-
story limitation.
Similarly, the new residential towers built across the 
Hudson River in Jersey City have generally been built 
with PVC piping. 
Aligning New York City’s Plumbing Code with national 
best practices would reduce material and labor costs, 
speed construction, and help make housing development 
more affordable without compromising fire safety and 
building performance standards. There have not been any 
recent studies detailing the cost differential in New York, 
Revise the city’s plumbing code  
to allow greater use of PVC piping, 
bringing New York City in line with 
the rest of the country.
3
but a 2017 report by Philadelphia’s Building Industry 
Association estimated that using PVC instead of metal 
piping in a 240-unit high-rise residential building could 
reduce overall construction costs by 16.7 percent. In New 
York City, this would translate to savings of hundreds 
of thousands or even millions of dollars per building, 
depending on the size of the project.
"PVC is one of the low-hanging fruit, easy building 
code changes to help with costs," says David Kramer, 
president of Hudson Companies, a New York-based 
housing developer.
“It’s a much lower material cost,” adds the head of 
pre-construction for another housing developer, who 
wished to remain anonymous. “The handling on site is 
significantly easier. It’s not as heavy, so you can transport 
it more efficiently. It’s less corrosive. We regularly use PVC 
piping outside of New York. We do it because there are 
major cost savings.”
New York’s longtime restrictions on PVC have largely 
been based on fire-safety concerns. Unlike cast iron, PVC 
can burn or melt when exposed to fire, producing smoke 
and corrosive gases and potentially leaving openings where 
pipes pass through fire-rated walls and floors. But building 
codes elsewhere address these risks through tested firestop 
systems, fire-rated assemblies, and other installation 
requirements. Some buildings also use a hybrid approach, 
retaining cast iron for the main vertical stacks that run 
from floor to floor while using less expensive PVC for the 
smaller branch lines that connect individual apartments 
and fixtures.
Several people we interviewed say that the plumbers’ 
union has been the main opponent of greater use of PVC 
piping, in large part because lightweight plastic piping 
requires fewer hours of labor to transport and install than 
cast iron. But lowering the cost of individual projects could 
also allow scarce public housing dollars to support more 
projects overall—particularly at HPD, where the number of 
affordable housing developments that can move forward 
each year is constrained by available capital funding.
Retaining well-paying union jobs is undoubtedly 
important. But so is solving the city’s affordability crisis, 
and reasonable reforms to allow PVC in more buildings 
would lower development costs and spark the new housing 
that New York so badly needs, without compromising safety. 
Mayor Mamdani can help make this happen. He 
should start by directing the Department of Buildings to 
review the city’s Plumbing Code and assess the viability of 
raising the five-story limitation for PVC piping systems. 
DOB should examine national best practices, consult 
fire safety experts, and determine whether revised rules 
could allow greater use of PVC while maintaining rigorous 
fire safety and building performance standards. The 
administration should then work with the City Council 
to advance any necessary changes to the Plumbing Code.
Mayor Mamdani should also consider two other 
related reforms to reduce development costs by allowing 
greater use of plastic piping: 
Reduce restrictions on nonmetallic sprinkler piping. 
Currently, nonmetallic sprinkler piping is permitted in 
residential buildings only up to six stories high; taller 
residential buildings must use metallic piping. But the 
building experts we interviewed say these restrictions 
merit another look. Because water in sprinkler systems 
generally sits at ambient temperature rather than cycling 
continuously between hot and cold, they argue that 
approved nonmetallic piping could be used more broadly 
without compromising safety. “Using PVC sprinkler pipe 
would be an appropriate use even for a conservative 
building code,” says the preconstruction head for a housing 
development company. Former FDNY Commissioner 
Laura Kavanagh adds: "We've approached the safety 
question with too narrow a lens. Yes, a foot of metal pipe 
will always carry a better fire rating than a foot of PVC pipe. 
But sprinklered buildings are the single most effective way 
to protect people from fire, and the real safety question 
isn't which pipe performs better on paper, it's how many 
buildings actually get sprinklers installed. If allowing PVC 
means more retrofits and more new construction come 
with sprinkler systems, that's a measurable, system-wide 
safety gain for New Yorkers."
End the ban on PEX piping for potable water. 
While PVC is allowed for sanitary piping in some low-
rise buildings, PEX—a flexible plastic tubing widely used 
elsewhere for hot- and cold-water supply lines—is entirely 
prohibited from potable water distribution throughout 
the city. New York is one of just two major U.S. cities 
(Chicago is the other) that prohibit its use for potable 
water. Expanding the use of PEX could significantly lower 
building costs. “If you take a copper pipe and replace it with 
PEX, you are going to save 30 percent on the materials 
and labor hours it takes,” says the pre-construction leader.
4
5 IDEAS FOR REDUCING BUREAUCRATIC BARRIERS IN NYC
2
Stop OMB from re-underwriting 
every affordable housing project.
THE MAMDANI ADMINISTRATION’S BLOCK BY BLOCK  
housing plan calls for building 200,000 new affordable 
homes and preserving another 200,000 over the next 
decade, backed by $22 billion in city capital funding 
over five years. His administration has also launched the 
SPEED initiative, which aims to shorten environmental 
review, permitting, and lease-up and cut at least eight 
months from the development timeline for affordable-
housing projects. But one major source of delay remains 
largely untouched: The Office of Management and 
Budget’s (OMB) practice of conducting another detailed 
financial review after the city’s housing experts have 
already approved a project. 
By the time an affordable-housing development 
seeks a Certificate to Proceed from OMB, a project 
manager at the Department of Housing Preservation and 
Development (HPD) has evaluated its construction budget, 
operating costs, rents, financing, and need for city subsidy. 
Supervisors and senior HPD officials review the deal, 
HPD’s Credit Committee approves it, and private lenders, 
attorneys, appraisers, and other specialists conduct their 
own due diligence. Yet the project generally cannot close 
on its financing and begin construction until OMB issues 
its Certificate to Proceed.
That final review can take several months and revisit 
many of the same questions. A December 2025 New York 
Housing Conference brief found that OMB subjects every 
capital-funded housing project to a document containing 
more than 40 questions, including projects that comply 
with term sheets OMB has already approved. OMB may 
request detailed explanations of individual budget lines, 
rents, financing terms, and site conditions, along with 
copies of appraisals, ground leases, and other materials 
previously reviewed by HPD, its lawyers, lenders, and the 
Credit Committee. HPD project managers can face several 
rounds of questions and document requests lasting weeks 
or months. 
Rachel Fee, executive director of the New York 
Housing Conference and a former HPD project manager, 
says developers routinely allow at least six months for the 
Certificate to Proceed process. Preparing the submission 
and answering follow-up questions can consume days of 
a project manager’s time and draw in directors, assistant 
commissioners, and HPD’s budget office. “For OMB to 
re-underwrite a project is insane,” Fee says. “You just had 
experts at the agency and private industry and a private 
lender all agree this deal makes sense.” 
The city comptroller’s office documented the same 
problem in a 2024 review based on nearly 40 interviews 
with current and former staff, developers, and nonprofit 
organizations. The report found that OMB had become 
increasingly involved in individual project underwriting, 
providing rounds of comments that added significant 
time. The report traced much of the problem to outdated 
HPD term sheets—the rules that establish program 
requirements, loan conditions, and subsidy limits. Because 
many developments no longer fit within OMB-approved 
terms, OMB had greater latitude to negotiate deals one at a 
time. These additional reviews, the comptroller concluded, 
added delays “with little benefit or cost savings to the City.” 
OMB disputes the claim that its review adds another 
sequential approval. At a June 2026 City Council budget 
hearing, an OMB official said the agency reviews projects 
concurrently with HPD and therefore does not add time 
to the overall development process. But concurrent review 
does not mean that OMB causes no delay: a project cannot 
5
close on its financing until OMB issues a Certificate to 
Proceed, and developers and housing officials report 
that unresolved OMB questions can hold up that final 
approval for weeks or months. The city comptroller 
likewise found that repeated rounds of OMB comments 
add significant time to the development process. OMB 
says it uses the review to confirm that expenses qualify 
for capital funding and comply with approved term sheets. 
But those objectives do not explain why projects that 
already conform to OMB-approved rules should undergo 
another detailed underwriting review.
The wider costs of slow loan processing can add up 
quickly. In a 2025 survey covering 21 affordable-housing 
projects and 4,700 apartments, the New York Housing 
Conference found that HPD loan processing took an 
average of 47 months. Among projects that quantified 
the financial impact, delays added an average of $1.2 
million per project. At that rate, just 25 delayed projects 
would incur $30 million in additional costs—roughly 
equivalent to the HPD capital subsidy needed to finance 
200 additional affordable homes for New Yorkers. OMB 
review was one of several causes cited, alongside HPD 
staffing, interagency approvals, land-use review, and other 
internal processes.
The financial consequences of delay are especially 
serious when borrowing costs are elevated and tariffs 
have added uncertainty. While a project awaits approval, 
developers continue paying interest, insurance, taxes, 
and other costs associated with controlling the site. 
Construction bids can expire, financing assumptions can 
shift, and a deal that worked when HPD approved it may 
require more city subsidy several months later. 
“Every month of delay increases costs and makes it 
harder to address the housing crisis at the scale required,” 
Fee said when the Mamdani administration released its 
SPEED reforms in May. A process intended to protect city 
funds can therefore consume scarce staff time and enlarge 
the financing gap the city must eventually fill. 
To overcome this bureaucratic obstacle to housing 
production, Mayor Mamdani should direct HPD and OMB 
to replace routine project-by-project re-underwriting 
with a two-track approval system: An expedited path 
for projects that conform to current program rules, and 
a fuller review reserved for the exceptions that actually 
warrant it. The two agencies should regularly update 
each major loan program's term sheet to reflect market 
conditions and the administration's affordability goals, 
and OMB should approve annual funding levels for each 
program. Once those rules and budgets are set, HPD 
should have clear responsibility for underwriting and 
selecting projects within them—with OMB's per-project 
role limited to confirming that a deal fits the terms it 
already approved.
Once HPD’s Credit Committee approves a 
development that conforms to a current term sheet, OMB 
should conduct an expedited review limited primarily 
to capital eligibility and basic fiscal compliance. More 
intensive review should be reserved for projects that 
materially exceed established subsidy limits, depart from 
program requirements, use an unusual financing structure, 
or present a specific financial risk. This closely follows the 
comptroller’s recommendation that OMB approve current 
term sheets and then limit its review of individual projects 
to capital eligibility. 
The administration should also establish firm 
deadlines for routine Certificate to Proceed reviews, require 
OMB to identify its substantive concerns in the first round 
of comments, and publish quarterly data showing how 
many projects are awaiting approval and how long they 
have been pending. The reporting should also show how 
often OMB’s review produces a meaningful reduction in 
city subsidy or another material change to the deal. That 
would allow City Hall to judge the process by its results 
rather than assuming that additional review necessarily 
produces additional value.
Mayor Mamdani has already begun shortening 
the path through site selection, environmental review, 
permitting, and lease-up. He should now address the last 
stretch between HPD approval and construction closing. 
Once a development meets current rules that OMB itself 
has approved, the city’s housing professionals should have 
the authority to move it forward.
6
5 IDEAS FOR REDUCING BUREAUCRATIC BARRIERS IN NYC
BUILDING OUT BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS  
across the five boroughs will be essential to meeting 
New York’s clean-energy goals, modernizing the city’s 
aging electrical grid, and maintaining reliable power 
as buildings and vehicles electrify. By charging when 
electricity demand is lower and releasing power when 
demand is highest, batteries can reduce reliance on 
polluting peaker plants, while easing pressure on the 
grid during surges in demand, from heat waves to cold 
snaps. To meet these goals, New York State’s energy 
storage roadmap projects that New York City will need 
roughly 2,000 megawatts of storage by 2030. Yet as of 
the end of 2025, the city had just 84 operating battery-
storage facilities totaling about 115 megawatts—less 
than 6 percent of that anticipated need.
The stakes for New Yorkers are significant. New 
York State estimates that meeting its energy-storage 
target would save nearly $2 billion by reducing the need 
for more expensive power plants and other costly grid 
investments. In New York City, batteries can also reduce 
reliance on highly polluting and costly peaker plants 
that run mainly when demand is highest. One analysis 
found that city ratepayers spent about $4.5 billion over 
a decade just to keep those plants available when needed.
The barrier to battery storage is no longer principally 
zoning. New York City has made community-scale battery 
storage broadly allowable as of right and established 
some of the nation’s most rigorous safety standards. 
But the city has yet to create the coordinated systems 
for permitting, utility interconnection, and community 
engagement needed to move more projects from proposal 
to operation. A single community-scale installation can 
require as many as 16 permits from six city agencies—a 
process that can easily take more than a year, not including 
major delays connecting a permitted installation to the 
grid. “We’re grateful to operate under the nation’s leading 
safety standards when it comes to BESS, but we do face a 
challenge of multiple permitting processes that happen 
sequentially and aren’t coordinated,” says Sam Brill, vice 
president of strategic development at NineDot Energy, 
a Brooklyn-based developer of community-scale battery 
systems.
The clearest example is the relationship between 
the Fire Department and the Department of Buildings’ 
Office of Technical Certification and Research, or OTCR. 
FDNY approves the battery equipment and conducts a 
site-specific safety review. The project then proceeds to 
OTCR, where experts say the review covers many of the 
same questions, before undergoing standard plan review 
and other approvals. Developers and city officials describe 
waiting three or four months for an FDNY response, 
replying within 48 hours, and then waiting several more 
months—only to begin a separate OTCR review that can 
add approximately three more months. The city itself 
recognized the need for reform in its 2023 PowerUp 
NYC plan, which committed to cutting energy-storage 
permitting delays by 50 percent. But review times remain 
lengthy and variable, even as far more projects prepare 
to enter the system.
Community-scale storage is only one key challenge. 
Bringing batteries directly into residential and commercial 
buildings may prove just as consequential for meeting the 
city’s climate and resiliency goals, by helping buildings 
manage peak demand, reducing pressure on the grid, and 
maintaining power during outages. Yet today, according 
to a top city economic development official, city-issued 
3
Clear the approval bottlenecks 
holding back battery storage.
certifications for previously approved residential-scale 
products have lapsed, leaving no active product approved 
for this use. 
“Currently, while there are a handful of residential 
battery storage products on the Certificate of Approval 
list, their approval expired in May 2025, effectively 
making residential battery deployment impossible 
today,” the official says. When it comes to indoor 
units, requirements for remote monitoring, extensive 
fire suppression, and specially designed containment 
rooms make this option prohibitively expensive for most 
property owners.
The process is also understaffed. Experts say that 
FDNY’s civilian team responsible for product certification 
and site approvals has just a handful of full-time staff and 
has not grown enough to keep pace, despite temporary 
support from the New York State Energy Research and 
Development Authority. “The top priority that needs to 
be addressed is the staffing capacity issue,” the economic 
development official says. 
City permits are not the only hurdle. Battery 
projects also need Con Edison’s approval to connect 
to the electrical grid, and changes the utility made to 
its interconnection process beginning in 2025 have 
sharply increased costs for projects in areas it considers 
constrained. Industry groups say 34 projects reviewed 
under the new methodology faced an average increase of 
$21 million in required grid upgrades, rendering many 
projects financially unworkable. Con Edison maintains 
that the additional scrutiny is necessary to ensure that 
batteries do not strain an aging electrical network, but 
developers and city officials argue that the methodology 
overstates the risk by counting speculative projects that 
may never be built and failing to account for batteries’ 
ability to limit when and how quickly they charge.
Other states are beginning to tackle similar problems. 
Massachusetts regulators are exploring whether batteries 
can connect under enforceable limits on when and how 
quickly they charge, how to remove inactive projects from 
the interconnection queue, and which projects should 

8
5 IDEAS FOR REDUCING BUREAUCRATIC BARRIERS IN NYC8
qualify for expedited review. The state is also testing an 
approach in which the upfront cost of grid upgrades can 
be spread among future projects that benefit from the 
added capacity, rather than requiring the first project 
to bear the full cost.
To make progress on battery storage, policymakers 
will have to address these roadblocks, with the most 
immediate opportunity for reform resting within 
city government itself. Mayor Mamdani should start 
by directing FDNY and DOB to establish a single 
coordinated permitting pathway for battery storage. The 
agencies should review applications concurrently, use a 
shared submission and checklist, and either eliminate 
OTCR review where it duplicates FDNY’s technical 
and safety analysis or confine it to distinct building-
code questions. To address the immediate backlog, 
the city should permanently expand FDNY’s civilian 
staff and DOB’s battery-storage review capacity, while 
establishing a pool of qualified third-party engineers who 
can conduct technical reviews under FDNY standards 
and final authority—building on the interim assistance 
NYSERDA is already supporting. The administration 
should also publish quarterly data on the number, status, 
and elapsed review time of applications and establish 
clear review targets for each stage of the process.
For smaller residential battery systems using 
approved products and standardized designs, New 
York should also create an expedited pathway. Austin 
now accepts third-party review and inspection of 
home backup installations—including battery-storage 
systems of up to 600 volts—for one- and two-family 
homes. Once a licensed engineer, master electrician, or 
certified inspector attests that the installation meets 
city codes, Austin verifies the documentation and issues 
the permit within three business days. New York would 
need safeguards tailored to its denser building stock, 
but the principle is sound: qualified outside experts 
could review standardized installations under FDNY 
rules, while the city retains oversight and final authority.
The city should also work with the state to resolve the 
interconnection barriers threatening otherwise viable 
projects. Although New York City does not regulate 
Con Edison, the Mamdani administration can press the 
Public Service Commission and Department of Public 
Service to bring Con Edison, developers, independent 
engineers, and city officials together to address the 
current impasse. The process should remove inactive 
and speculative projects from the queue, allow batteries 
to connect under enforceable limits on when and how 
quickly they charge, and develop a fairer approach to 
sharing the cost of grid upgrades that benefit multiple 
projects and customers.
These reforms would preserve substantive 
protections for residents and first responders while 
moving the city much closer to achieving its climate, 
reliability, and resiliency goals. New York has already 
determined that battery storage is essential and changed 
its zoning to make room for it. The next step is to 
remove the bureaucratic and procedural barriers that 
are stymieing the deployment of this vital infrastructure 
at scale.

99
IT IS NOT JUST SMALL BUSINESSES, HOUSING  
developers, and construction contractors that struggle to 
get things done in New York City because of unnecessary 
and outdated bureaucratic rules. City government itself 
is affected by one of the biggest bureaucratic barriers of 
all: a civil service system that makes it nearly impossible 
to hire people with the most in-demand technology skills. 
Today, city agencies have hundreds of vacant 
technology-related positions, in large part because the 
city’s civil service rules make it difficult to recruit and 
hire workers with rapidly evolving technology skills. 
And because city government has struggled to build 
sufficient technology capacity in-house, it regularly 
turns to outside consulting firms, spending hundreds 
of millions of dollars on work that could otherwise be 
performed by city employees. Perhaps most frustratingly, 
at a moment when artificial intelligence, data analytics, 
and other technologies hold enormous potential to make 
government faster, more responsive, and more effective, 
the city’s overly rigid civil service system makes it harder 
to hire the people needed to seize this opportunity.
Tackling this problem presents policymakers 
with a win-win: Modernizing technology hiring could 
create pathways into well-paying jobs for New Yorkers 
while saving the city money by reducing its reliance on 
expensive outside consultants.
These civil service rules impose significant 
restrictions and can cause long delays in hiring across 
city agencies. But the consequences are especially severe 
for technology-related positions, where the skills needed 
are changing rapidly. Indeed, the civil service system was 
designed for a very different labor market—not one in 
which job responsibilities and required skills can shift 
dramatically every year or two. “We have a system that 
was designed for the prior era,” says a tech policy expert 
who once served as the city’s chief technology officer. 
“Technology roles are changing so fast.”
City agencies increasingly need people with highly 
specific technology skills—including data architects, 
machine-learning engineers, cloud engineers, cybersecurity 
specialists, data scientists, product managers, and AI 
specialists. But the civil service system often produces 
the opposite result: candidate pools organized around 
broad technology titles—including “computer associate,” 
“computer specialist,” “computer systems manager,” 
“telecommunications associate,” “city research scientist,” 
“certified IT administrator,” and “IT security specialist”—
that often fail to align with the highly specific, up-to-date 
skills an agency is seeking. The civil service candidate 
may be qualified to administer a legacy computer system 
but lack the expertise needed to design modern data 
architecture or oversee projects involving cloud computing, 
machine learning, or artificial intelligence.
These rigid hiring rules greatly limit what agencies 
can achieve, and they carry a heavy cost. “Let's say the 
Department of Social Services wants to build a database 
showing who gets SNAP and where the city could 
distribute that benefit more efficiently," says Andrew 
Rasiej, a technology strategist and founder of Civic 
Hall @ Union Square. "Current civil service rules define 
'technologist' so broadly that the agency can't hire for 
what it actually needs: a tech project manager, data 
scientists, and AI engineers. The technologists it can hire 
were trained on older systems and have little experience 
building state-of-the-art technology, especially in the 
age of AI. So the agency brings in outside consultants 
4
Eliminate civil service restrictions 
that make it difficult for the city to 
hire people with the most  
in-demand technology skills.
10
5 IDEAS FOR REDUCING BUREAUCRATIC BARRIERS IN NYC10
at $300 or more an hour. That costs the city far more 
than it should and builds no skills inside government. 
And because the agency still can't hire the right people, 
the consultants stay on for years after the database is 
built to maintain it.”
The civil service system was designed with good 
intentions—to guard against patronage and ensure 
that hiring is based on merit rather than political 
connections—but too often it also makes hiring much 
slower and less flexible. For most city government 
positions, candidates first take a competitive civil 
service examination and, if they pass, are placed on an 
eligible list, ranked by their exam scores. Agencies with 
a staff vacancy must then work through that list and 
follow the city’s rules for identifying and appointing 
an eligible candidate, rather than simply recruiting and 
hiring whoever appears best qualified. The Department of 
Citywide Administrative Services (DCAS) says it generally 
takes up to a year after an exam is administered just to 
establish the eligible list from which agencies can hire.
Even without this delay-riddled hiring process, city 
government would be at a significant disadvantage competing 
for technology workers with private sector companies, which 
often have the capacity to pay higher salaries. But the civil 
service system makes it significantly more difficult for 
government. By the time an agency completes a lengthy 
recruitment process, the skills it originally sought may have 
changed—or the candidates who possessed those skills may 
have accepted jobs elsewhere.
Indeed, then Comptroller Brad Lander’s 2022 Title 
Vacant report found that the city was having difficulty 
filling positions that compete directly with the private 
sector. For example, the report noted that the NYC Cyber 
Command had a 36 percent vacancy rate. 
It’s time for city leaders to consider reforms to the 
cumbersome and costly civil service system, starting with 
the hiring process for technology workers. Modernizing 
technology titles, qualifications, examinations, and hiring 
procedures would allow agencies to build more capable 
internal teams, fill persistent vacancies, and reduce 
unnecessary dependence on expensive consultants. It 
would also enable the city to take advantage of today’s 
transformative technologies to make government faster, 
more responsive, and more effective. 
The Mamdani administration should take steps to 
give agencies substantially more flexibility to recruit for 
technology positions based on the skills actually required. 
More specifically, the mayor should direct DCAS and 
the Office of Technology and Innovation (OTI) to create 
technology-specific civil service titles in high-demand 
fields such as data science, data architecture, AI and 
machine learning, cybersecurity, and cloud engineering; 
establish a process for regularly updating technology 
job classifications; replace rigid degree requirements 
with skills- and experience-based qualifications where 
appropriate; expand non-exam hiring pathways for 
specialized technology positions where exams do not 
effectively measure the skills agencies need; create 
expedited hiring procedures for hard-to-fill technology 
positions; and give agencies greater flexibility to recruit 
candidates directly from the broader labor market. 
To win support for these changes, the administration 
should work to find common ground with the city’s 
municipal labor unions, including DC37—perhaps by 
committing to a major new city effort to upskill municipal 
workers in exchange for support for relaxing some civil 
service rules around technology hiring. The mayor should 
also work closely with the City Council and build on recent 
Council efforts, including proposed 2026 legislation 
that would require a study of 20 new technology-based 
civil service positions with more flexible educational 
pathways, as well as a resolution calling on DCAS to 
modernize technology-title qualifications and recognize 
experience gained through apprenticeships, technology 
training programs, and other nontraditional pathways.
While these and other tweaks to the civil service 
system are the necessary starting point, Mayor Mamdani 
and the City Council should also aim to make more 
fundamental changes: A holistic digital transformation 
for city government that modernizes city processes for 
everything from hiring and procurement to the way the 
city controls its data. 
In today’s digital age, New York needs to be able 
to hire a workforce that has the skills and credentials 
needed for the technology of today and tomorrow, 
not the technology of decades past. The first step is to 
modernize how the city hires technology workers. 
1111
5
Make joint bidding permanent  
to cut delays and costs on  
city infrastructure projects.
SOME OF NEW YORK CITY’S MOST COSTLY CONSTRUCTION 
delays start with a problem most New Yorkers never see. 
When the city replaces a water main, rebuilds a sewer, or 
reconstructs a street, the work often runs into electrical 
conduits, gas mains, telecommunications lines, and other 
privately owned infrastructure buried beneath the same 
pavement. Historically, the city would hire a contractor 
and open the street before the utility company negotiated 
with that same contractor over the cost of moving its 
equipment. With little practical ability to bring in another 
firm, those negotiations could drag on while construction 
stopped and streets remained torn up.
The city has a proven way to avoid this mess. 
Under joint bidding, the city competitively bids its 
own infrastructure work and the necessary utility 
work together, before construction begins. The city’s 
Department of Design and Construction (DDC) estimates 
that this relatively obscure procurement reform saves the 
city more than $107 million annually and has reduced 
average utility-related delays from roughly 28 months 
to seven.
But after operating for years under long-term 
state authorization, joint bidding has been caught in a 
bureaucratic entanglement of its own. First authorized 
for Lower Manhattan in 2004, following September 
11, and later expanded citywide, joint bidding most 
recently operated under a ten-year authorization that 
expired at the end of 2024. Since then, the authority 
has been subject to an annual negotiation in Albany, 
resulting in a series of one-year extensions. That forces 
city infrastructure planners to build multiyear projects 
around a procurement authority that extends little more 
than a year into the future and sends DDC back to Albany 
year after year to preserve a tool that has already proved 
its value. 
Governor Hochul and the State Legislature should 
end this cycle by making joint bidding permanent—or, 
at minimum, restoring a ten-year authorization.
The problem joint bidding solves is remarkably 
straightforward. Private utilities are generally responsible 
for moving or protecting their equipment when it 
interferes with a city project. But under the traditional 
process—known as Section U—the city’s contractor 
is already on the job by the time that work has to be 
arranged. Because only one contractor can generally 
hold the permit for an open street, the utility has little 
leverage to shop the work around. It negotiates with 
the city’s contractor, often after excavation has begun, 
while the city waits for the two sides to reach a deal. DDC 
describes utilities as having “no other feasible option but 
to hire the winning bidder,” with resulting deadlocks 
leaving public works projects “stalled for months and 
sometimes years on end.”
“The contractors know they have the upper hand in 
these negotiations,” says an official with a utility company, 
who requested anonymity to speak candidly. "This kind 
of interference work is a utility's legal obligation, and 
the cost of this work is paid by customers. Without more 
robust cost protections in the contracting process, some 
private contractors will use their position to gouge the 
utility companies, resulting in delays and increased costs 
for ratepayers."
Data provided to CUF by a utility illustrates how 
large the difference can be. The utility says a manhole 
rebuild that costs roughly $250,000 to $350,000 when 
competitively bid has cost between $750,000 and $2 
12
5 IDEAS FOR REDUCING BUREAUCRATIC BARRIERS IN NYC12
million when negotiated as interference work on a city 
project. In another case, it says a roughly 70-foot gas-
service installation in Manhattan cost more than $3 
million, compared with an estimated competitive price 
of roughly $100,000.
DDC’s own analysis offers more evidence of the 
savings. Utility-related delays generated an average of 
$5.8 million in additional overhead on traditional Section 
U projects, compared with $1.5 million under joint 
bidding. Utilities also reimburse the city for a portion 
of shared project overhead. DDC has pointed to the $139 
million reconstruction of Downtown Far Rockaway, 
completed in 2022 with $25 million in savings; the 
agency says that without joint bidding, the project would 
still have been under construction when it published its 
analysis two years later.
Despite that record, joint bidding has been operating 
on short-term extensions since 2024, as lawmakers 
have given the city, utilities, and contractors time to 
resolve longstanding disputes over how the program 
should operate. The Legislature passed another one-
year extension this spring; as of September, the bills 
had passed both houses but had not yet been delivered 
to Governor Hochul.
Even if signed, that extension would not resolve the 
underlying problem. The annual cycle forces DDC staff  
and leadership to spend valuable time repeatedly making 
the case in Albany for an extension, while making it 
harder to plan multiyear projects and predict their costs 
and impacts. Utility officials also warn that repeatedly 
reopening the program through short-term extensions 
can allow some of the very inefficiencies joint bidding was 
created to eliminate to creep back in. Meanwhile, DDC 
officials say one-year authorizations are fundamentally 
at odds with the timescale of major infrastructure work, 
making it harder to reduce cost overruns and delays and 
improve predictability.
“The advantage of joint bidding is that the rules of 
engagement are clear from the beginning,” says DDC 
Associate Commissioner Jeffrey Margolies. “But it’s not 
feasible to manage a multibillion-dollar, multiyear capital 
program with a one-year horizon.”
Joint bidding is hardly a program frozen in place. 
It is now in its sixth iteration, and DDC recently spent 
13 months and roughly 40 working sessions with 
contractors and utilities developing a new framework 
that revamped bidding, required more utility engineering 
upfront, clarified responsibilities during construction, 
and established penalties for avoidable delays.
Contractors have raised concerns about the program. 
The New York Road Contractors Association argued in 
2024 that earlier versions set utility-work prices too low, 
forcing contractors to make up those costs elsewhere 
in their bids, and that inadequate utility engineering 
contributed to delays and overruns. DDC has disputed 
those claims but has also repeatedly modified joint 
bidding in response to industry concerns, including 
through the latest overhaul.
Those debates are an argument for keeping joint 
bidding flexible, not for putting its future at risk every 
year. DDC should keep working with contractors and 
utilities to improve pricing, strengthen advance planning, 
and hold each party responsible for delays it causes. But 
those questions can be worked through without requiring 
the city to repeatedly seek permission from Albany to 
use the underlying procurement tool.
Albany should provide that long-term authority—
ideally by making joint bidding permanent, or at 
minimum by restoring a ten-year authorization. Mayor 
Mamdani should make that change a priority in the city’s 
2027 legislative agenda.
New York does not need another short-term 
experiment to know whether joint bidding works. It 
has two decades of experience, and city data showing 
that the program can save more than $100 million a year 
and cut nearly two years from utility-related delays. The 
next step is to give the city the long-term authority to 
keep using it.
5 IDEAS FOR REDUCING BUREAUCRATIC BARRIERS IN NYC
1313
Conclusion
Reducing these frustrating, costly, and time-consuming bureaucratic rules and processes will be critical in the coming 
months and years as New York works to tackle serious affordability and competitiveness challenges amid growing 
fiscal constraints. The Mamdani administration has already taken an important step by launching the Commission 
on Government Efficiency and advancing five ballot proposals aimed at making city government work better. But 
the opportunities for reform extend well beyond the City Charter. The five barriers highlighted in this report show 
how outdated rules, duplicative reviews, and fragmented approval processes continue to raise costs, slow housing 
and infrastructure, impede clean-energy investment, and limit the city’s ability to hire the talent it needs.
The administration and City Council should build on COGE’s momentum and move quickly on a broader 
bureaucratic reform agenda, including these practical steps:
•  Allow greater use of PVC and other lower-cost piping materials in multifamily 
housing while maintaining rigorous safety standards.
• End routine OMB re-underwriting of affordable-housing projects that already 
comply with approved term sheets and have cleared HPD review.
• Create a coordinated, faster approval process for battery storage, while pressing 
the state to resolve interconnection barriers.
• Modernize civil service rules for technology hiring so agencies can recruit workers 
with current, in-demand skills and reduce reliance on costly consultants.
• Make joint bidding permanent—or at minimum restore a long-term authorization 
so the city can reduce utility-related delays and costs on major infrastructure 
projects.
With affordability pressures mounting and fiscal constraints tightening, these reforms should be implemented 
swiftly in the months ahead, building on the administration’s momentum to improve efficiency across government 
and helping create the more affordable and competitive city New Yorkers need.
