TITLE: More Aboard
URL: https://cbcny.org/research/more-aboard
ISSUED: 2026-05-06
PDF: https://cbcny.org/sites/default/files/media/files/CBCREPORT_Fair-Bus-Fares_05062026.pdf

REPORT  TRANSPORTATION
More Aboard
Expand Fair Fares NYC
Press Release
Download Report
Print
Share
EXPAND TABLE OF CONTENTS
May 06, 2026
Contents
Executive Summary
Introduction
Fare-Free Buses Fall Short
Improving Fair Fares NYC Would Increase Program Effectiveness and Transit Affordability
Improving Streets and Optimizing Operations Would Increase Bus Speeds
Recommendations
Conclusion
Appendix: Enrollment and Cost Methodology
Executive Summary

Mayor Zohran Mamdani’s campaign platform included making buses fast and free. Improving affordability—especially for lower income New Yorkers—is essential for the city to remain an epicenter of opportunity and vitality. Lowering transit costs can expand access to economic opportunity as well as help with families’ bottom line. But any approach should target those most in need, maximize the impact of every dollar, and ensure the transit system remains well-resourced and effectively managed. 

“Free” buses would be expensive, exceeding $900 million the first year, with much of the money providing benefits to bus riders who can afford the fare while providing no financial relief to low-income commuters who rely on the subway. Free buses are unlikely to increase speeds; in fact, the opposite is more likely—higher bus ridership could lead to more crowding, slower speeds, and demands for increased bus services. 

Instead, the City should expand eligibility for Fair Fares NYC, which now provides half-price transit fares to New Yorkers below 150 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL). This is a more targeted, cost-effective approach that improves transit affordability and allows riders to choose the mode best for them.

CBC’s analysis of fare-free buses and Fair Fares NYC found the following:

Fare elimination:
Eliminating bus fares would cost more than $900 million in the first year, with costs rising thereafter; and
Nearly three out of every four New Yorkers living below 250 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL) use the subway to get to work and would not benefit from bus fare elimination. 
Bus speeds: 
Fare-free bus programs in NYC and other places have consistently increased ridership, but rarely increased speed; and
NYC has already identified street and operational improvements that would increase bus speeds more reliably and for less money than a fare-free bus program. 
Existing Fair Fares NYC program:
Fair Fares NYC enrolls nearly 400,000 New Yorkers, 31 percent of the 1.23 million eligible, who take an average of three rides per week, a relatively low adoption rate which could be improved;
Fair Fares NYC cost $86 million in fiscal year 2025; 
A majority of adults currently eligible for Fair Fares NYC are not employed and less likely to have a regular commute that would utilize the Fair Fares NYC discount; and
Individuals earning just above the current Fair Fares NYC eligibility level are more likely to be employed and use public transit to commute to work than those currently eligible (71 percent, compared to 39 percent), meaning eligibility expansion could lead to higher utilization and overall impact.
CBC recommends that the City:
Increase eligibility for Fair Fares NYC to individuals making up to 250 percent of the FPL, adding 722,000 New Yorkers and at a projected cost of $146 million per year; 
Increase utilization of Fair Fares NYC by improving education, outreach, and simplifying enrollment processes; and
Collaborate with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) to implement infrastructure improvements and operational changes to cost-effectively improve bus speeds. 

Raising the eligibility threshold would cover households with two members who work full-time and earn approximately 20 percent more than minimum wage. This expansion would make approximately 2 million eligible for the program, covering one out of four working adults.

At about one-sixth the cost of fare-free buses, expanding Fair Fares NYC would preserve the City’s fiscal resources, particularly when it faces significant budget gaps, while making transit more affordable and allowing eligible New Yorkers to choose between the bus or the subway. Lastly, maintaining a fare helps ensure the system is used efficiently by moderating demand and encouraging thoughtful use of transit services. 

Introduction

A major plank of Mayor Mamdani’s campaign platform was to make New York City’s buses fast and free. Concerns about affordability and City bus speeds are well-founded. New York City’s buses are some of the slowest in the nation, with an average speed of 7.0 miles per hour, 29.3 percent slower than the 9.9 miles per hour average among other major bus systems in the US, according to the latest national data.1

Making buses fare-free, however, is unlikely to systemically solve the challenges of affordability or speed.  While eliminating fares would reduce costs for bus riders, it would not save subway commuters money. Affordability is also not a challenge for all bus riders—subsidizing those who can afford transit fares is an inefficient use of limited tax dollars.

New York City already has a transit affordability program. Fair Fares NYC uses City funds to provide a half-fare discount to individuals living at or below 150 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL). Participants benefit from reduced fares on both buses and subways, enabling them to take the mode that works best for them.

Eliminating bus fares may not increase speeds; in fact, dwell times increased and speeds decreased in a New York City free bus pilot.

Fare-free buses would not truly be free. Instead, they would shift the cost of running the bus system from riders to City taxpayers. The City would spend more than $900 million per year to replace the MTA’s current bus fare revenues.2 Initial costs may be slightly offset by savings on fare collection or enforcement. However, costs are likely to exceed one billion dollars per year after certain paratransit trips also become fare-free (as required by federal law,) ridership grows, and/or the MTA asks to be reimbursed for all riders, rather than just the 51percent who pay today.  Fully 49 percent of bus riders currently evade the fare.3

Instead of fare-free buses, Mayor Mamdani should prioritize programs that spend public dollars efficiently and avoid subsidizing individuals who do not need the government’s support. Rather than making buses free, the City should increase eligibility for Fair Fares NYC to 250 percent of the FPL. This expansion would make an additional 722,000 New Yorkers between 18 and 64 years of age eligible for the program at an annual cost of $150 million, just one-sixth of the cost of eliminating bus fares. Furthermore, the MTA should continue and expand operational efforts to improve bus speeds. 

Expanding the Fair Fares NYC program is a more targeted and cost-effective approach that would: 

Better serve households struggling with transit affordability by ensuring they have access to both the bus and subway system; 
Allow the City to retain fiscal resources during a time of budgetary stress; and 
Ensure the MTA can continue to provide quality, financially sound services. 
Fare-Free Buses Fall Short

Making buses fare-free is unlikely to improve affordability or bus speeds. Low-income riders who take the subway would not benefit. Fare-free buses may reduce service quality if higher ridership decreases bus speeds or leads to overcrowding. The MTA’s costs and dependence on City funding could also increase.

Would Not Reduce Costs for Most Riders Who Need Support

Making buses fare-free will not reduce the costs for most riders: 76 percent of transit trips are on the subway, and the 12 percent of bus riders who transfer to the subway would still have to pay a subway fare.4 

Approximately 50 percent of commuters below 250 percent of the FPL who live in NYC use public transit to get to work, and nearly three out of four primarily use the subway to get there, according to the American Community Survey.5 (See Figure 1.) For riders who transfer from the bus to subway, fare-free buses would shift the point of payment from the bus to the subway and not lower their transportation costs. 

Transit riders enrolled in Fair Fares NYC benefit from reduced fares on both buses and subways. Fully 70 percent of 2025 Fair Fares rides were on the subway. Fair Fares NYC riders transfer to the subway nearly twice as much as the MTA’s general ridership (22 percent compared to 12 percent).6

Could Reduce Service Quality

Making buses fare-free does not necessarily make them faster. The MTA’s 2023-2024 fare-free bus pilot program showed that eliminating fares slowed service. Dwell times—the amount of time a bus spends stopped at a bus stop—increased six percentage points more for routes in the pilot compared to those not in the pilot. Fare-free pilot bus routes did not improve their speeds relative to the pre-pilot period. In fact, some fare-free pilot buses slowed down more than other buses in the system.7

The MTA is not an outlier in this regard: Fare-free buses move at the same or slower speeds than paid buses across small and large transit agencies. The City of Boston found that bus routes in its fare-free bus pilot program had no change in bus travel times, as the increase in ridership offset the ability of individual riders to move more quickly onto the bus without having to pay a fare.8 The Merrimack Valley Transit Authority in Massachusetts, a small transit system that carries fewer than 10,000 passengers daily, also found that going fare-free had no significant impact on their buses’ on-time performance rate.9

Fare-free buses would likely increase ridership that would lead to overcrowding or necessitate additional bus service. Without fares, more people would use the bus more often, including for short trips they might otherwise have walked. Ridership increased on MTA fare-free bus pilot routes between 22 percent and 55 percent, depending on the route, season, and day of week.10 This increase aligns with the experience of other U.S. transit systems, which report ridership increases of 20 percent to 60 percent after going fare-free.11

Transit agencies with extra capacity can absorb ridership increases without having to alter service patterns. This was the case for the MTA’s pilot program. Ridership data from 2022, the year prior to the pilot program, shows that fare-free pilot bus routes were not among the highest ridership routes in the system. These routes had capacity to absorb the additional riders that the fare-free pilot program attracted.12 However, not all routes will be able to similarly absorb the ridership increases associated with going fare-free, and significant ridership growth would require the MTA to increase bus service to prevent overcrowding and maintain existing levels of customer satisfaction and comfort. Increased service could further raise the cost of fare-free buses—which again, taxpayers would foot the bill for. Alternatively, the MTA could choose not to run additional service, which would lead to overcrowded buses and a degraded rider experience. 

Could Weaken MTA Finances

Fare-free buses could weaken the MTA’s fiscal stability by encouraging more subway fare evasion by riders who believe transit should be free regardless of mode, and by reducing subway ridership. Fare-free buses would increase the share of the MTA’s revenue allocated annually by City appropriation, perhaps increasing the risks to the MTA’s revenues in case of a recession or fiscal stress.

The MTA’s 2026 budget relies on $3.1 billion in subway fares.13 Making buses fare-free may encourage higher levels of subway fare evasion. CBC previously estimated that the MTA lost $350 million to subway fare evasion in 2024.14 The MTA found that the fare evasion increase was 10 percent higher at subway stations and bus routes that were near, but not part of, the fare-free pilot program, compared to the rest of the transit system.15

Fare-free buses also may lower subway ridership if individuals change their travel patterns to save money; such a shift would reduce MTA subway ridership and fare revenues, while also increasing bus crowding and slowing bus speeds—a ‘double hit’ for the MTA’s bottom line. For example, riders traveling from the Upper West Side to Midtown may switch from the 1 Train to the M104 bus, while riders along Fulton Street may switch from the C Train to the B25 bus. 

Making buses fare-free would also increase the MTA’s reliance on government funding and decrease its ability to self-fund operations with transit fares. Riders fund 29 percent of operating costs through transit fares; MTA bridge and tunnel surpluses fund approximately 5 percent, and the remaining 66 percent comes from dedicated taxes and government subsidies.16 If buses were fare-free, rider fares would cover 22 percent of the operating expenses, while the share covered by taxes and subsidies would increase to 73 percent. Increasing the MTA’s dependance on taxes and subsidies would make it more susceptible to external political and fiscal pressures.

Improving Fair Fares NYC Would Increase Program Effectiveness and Transit Affordability 

Expanding Fair Fares NYC would go a long way toward addressing transit affordability in the City. As currently structured, it has low enrollment and low utilization among those who are enrolled. 

Fair Fares NYC addresses affordability by providing a half-price transit fare to individuals aged 18 to 64 with incomes at or below 150 percent of the FPL.17 The City reimburses the MTA for the half fare not paid by the rider, which cost the City $83.6 million in fiscal year 2025 including administrative costs.18 As of March 2026, 379,910 individuals were enrolled, 31 percent of the estimated 1.23 million eligible City residents.19

In addition to limited enrollment, transit use by enrollees is low. In 2025, Fair Fares NYC supported 61.2 million rides, an average of 3.1 rides per week per enrollee.20 Program utilization may reflect the eligible population’s low labor force participation; 50 percent of NYC residents aged 18 to 64 living at or below 150 percent of the FPL do not work and are not looking for work.21 (See Figure 2.)

Employed low-income New Yorkers make 33 percent more public transit trips than low-income New Yorkers who are not employed.22 Transit affordability presents a larger challenge for individuals with low incomes as well as significant travel needs, such as commuting to work, than those who do not commute regularly. 

Expanding Fair Fares NYC would significantly increase transit affordability for those who need support and would use the program. To consider the cost and impact of expanding the program, CBC modeled various expansion scenarios. CBC estimated the eligible population, enrollment rate, and program cost for expansion based on data from the American Community Survey (ACS), existing Fair Fares NYC enrollment statistics, and MTA ridership data.23 The estimate was calculated for FPL income bands of 150 percent to 200 percent, 200 percent to 250 percent, 250 percent to 300 percent, and 300 percent to 400 percent. A range of costs were estimated based on potential enrollee utilization, with the midpoint used below for simplicity.

Within these bands, newly eligible individuals are projected to enroll at a higher rate based on labor force participation and commuting patterns, as well as to take more public transit rides than current participants. (See Appendix for a description of the methodology.) CBC found:

Increasing the threshold to 200 percent of the FPL, an income of $31,920 for a single person and $66,000 for a four-person household, would make an additional 366,000 residents eligible. The midpoint cost estimate would be $66 million. (See Table 1.)
Further increasing to 250 percent of FPL ($82,500 for a family of four) would make an additional 356,000 residents eligible, with a midpoint cost estimate of $77 million.
Further increasing to 300 percent of FPL ($99,000 for a family of four) would make an additional 320,000 more New Yorkers eligible, at a midpoint cost estimate of $78 million. The incremental cost is higher despite the smaller number of eligible individuals because workforce participation, and therefore projected enrollment, is higher.
Further increasing to 400 percent of FPL ($132,000 for a family of four) would make 608,000 New Yorkers eligible for the program, at a midpoint cost estimate of $148 million.

Raising the eligibility threshold of Fair Fares NYC to 250 percent of the FPL would cover households with two members who work full-time and earn approximately 20 percent more than minimum wage.24 This expansion would make an additional 722,000 New Yorkers eligible, bringing the total to approximately 2 million. It would also make 28 percent of working adults—1.2 million City residents—eligible for a transit subsidy.  Based on modestly higher usage and greater uptake due to the higher employment rates, the expansion would cost the City $146 million a year. The total cost of the expanded Fair Fares NYC program would be $232 million. 

To further improve the program, the City should identify and correct the causes of low enrollment and utilization of Fair Fares NYC.25 Additionally, more advertising or outreach regarding the program’s eligibility, benefits, and how to apply could boost enrollment. Understanding what barriers discourage eligible individuals from applying and why utilization is low should be a priority as the program is expanded. 

Improving Streets and Optimizing Operations Would Increase Bus Speeds

The City has various tools to increase bus speeds, many of which are described in the City’s Better Buses Action Plan.26 The NYC Department of Transportation can: 

Install additional bus lanes; 
Implement additional physically separated bus lanes or busways; 
Improve bus stops by building bulb-outs or bus boarders to effectively extend the sidewalk curb so that buses do not have to exit and re-enter traffic while stopping; 
Expand the use of bus queue jump signals, which allow buses to get ahead of other vehicle traffic at signalized intersections; 
Implement transit signal priority at more signalized intersections; 
Enforce existing street and parking regulations to reduce double-parking; and
Improve curb management practices to ensure delivery drivers have spaces available to unload and load their vehicles and keep them from blocking traffic. 

Additionally, the City can work with the MTA to:  

Expand automated camera enforcement by equipping more buses with technology necessary to automatically issue tickets to vehicles blocking bus lanes; 
Optimize bus routes, schedules, and stop patterns during the borough-by-borough bus network redesign process; and
Institute all-door boarding to allow bus riders to board and pay fares at both the front and back door.  

The MTA should evaluate the benefits, costs, and impacts of these measures on bus speeds before the City or MTA make significant investments. These approaches can likely improve bus speeds at a fraction of the expense associated with making the bus system fare-free. 

Recommendations 

Instead of making buses fare-free, the City should adopt the following four recommendations which would better serve low-income New Yorkers, wisely leverage limited fiscal resources, and improve bus speeds: 

Raise the Fair Fares NYC eligibility threshold to 250 percent of the FPL; 
Improve low uptake and utilization of Fair Fares NYC through expanded education, outreach, and enrollment strategies; 
Leverage proven strategies, such as signal priority and physically separated busways, to make the City’s streets more conducive to faster bus traffic; and
Work with the MTA to further improve bus speeds.
Conclusion

Fare-free buses are unlikely to achieve Mayor Mamdani’s stated goals of improving transit affordability and increasing bus speeds. Expanding eligibility for the existing Fair Fares NYC program and improving administration to increase uptake would provide half priced transit to 722,000 additional New Yorkers, including one-half million working adults, at only 16 percent of the cost of fare-free buses. It would better address transit affordability for those most burdened by the cost while providing low-income New Yorkers with access to both the bus network and the subway. 

Improving bus speeds will benefit all New Yorkers, reducing the ‘time tax’ paid by riders. Making buses fare-free is unlikely to increase speeds and may even make buses slower. The City should use existing tools to improve bus speeds, such as more and better bus lanes, busways, parking enforcement, and signalized intersection improvement. The City should make smart choices to provide public support to the individuals that need it the most and avoid a universal program that will be costly, disburse benefits to those not in need, and have other potentially negative impacts.

By Adam Schmidt

Senior Research Associate for Transportation
CBC Recommends Expanding Fair Fares NYC Program
No Fare
The Costs of MTA Fare and Toll Evasion
MTA Operating Budget Outlook: Short-Term Stability, Long-Term Risks
Download Report
More Aboard: Expand Fair Fares NYC (3.21 MB)
Appendix: Enrollment and Cost Methodology

To determine the cost of expanding Fair Fares NYC, CBC made a series of estimates based on ACS 2024 and the MTA data:

The number of individuals eligible for an expanded Fair Fares program under a range of income bands; 
The share of eligible individuals who would enroll under those income bands;
The number of rides each enrolled individual would take based on income bands; and
The lower-bound and upper-bound cost estimates based on projected rides and a 20 percent increase.

Employment characteristics and commuting behavior were used to model enrollment and ridership. Employment characteristics are associated with income: The share of working-age adults who are employed increases with income.[i] Employed working age adults commute more via public transit than those who are not working.[ii] Therefore, CBC assumed Fair Fares NYC’s enrollment rate would increase at higher income bands, and that employed commuters would use the program more frequently.

The number of currently enrolled individuals is 62 percent the size of eligible, employed population. CBC assumed this ratio would increase from 68 percent for those between 150 percent to 200 percent of the FPL to a maximum of 80 percent for those at or above 250 percent of FPL. (See Table 2.)

The average enrollee currently takes 159 rides per year. If the total rides currently taken were distributed across just the eligible individuals who are both employed and commute by public transit, each would take 655 rides per year (approximately 27 round-trip rides per month). The base assumption for ridership by employed, public transit commuters, 655 rides per year, is applied to projected enrollments for that group. The projected rides per enrollee are shown as “Enrollee Rides Per Year.” 

CBC estimated a lower and upper bound on the cost of fare reimbursements. The lower bound cost estimate is based on the “Enrollee Rides per Year” column and is adjusted to account for actual reimbursement rate that has been less than the total number of rides times 50 percent of the transit fare. In fiscal year 2025, the actual amount paid by the City to the MTA was 83 percent fare calculated based on total rides.29 The upper bound cost estimate assumes that individuals take 20 percent more public transit rides, with no downward adjustment for lower reimbursement rates. 

CBC assumed that administrative costs would benefit from economies of scale. The annual per enrollee administrative cost was estimated to be $8.31, half of the current administrative cost per enrollee. 

The midpoint used in CBC’s analysis is the average between the upper and lower bound, plus the administrative cost. (See Table 3.)

Footnotes
“Other major bus systems in the U.S.” in this context includes those in Boston, Chicago, New Jersey, Philadelphia, Washington, D.C., Atlanta, San Francisco, and Los Angeles. CBC staff analysis of U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Transit Administration, National Transit Database (2024), https://www.transit.dot.gov/ntd/ntd-data.
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, MTA 2026 Final Proposed Budget: November Financial Plan 2026-2029 Volume 2 (November 2025), https://www.mta.info/document/192541.
U.S. Code of Federal Regulations §37.131(c) requires that the fare charged for a paratransit trip not exceed two times the cost of the fare charged for a trip taken on the comparable fixed route service. Making buses fare-free would therefore require that any paratransit trips that could be completed using the bus system alone be made fare-free. Providing fare-free paratransit service during the MTA’s 2023-2024 fare-free bus pilot cost the MTA $2.8 million. See: Metropolitan Transportation Authority, MTA Bus Fare Evasion: Beginning 2019 (accessed January 27, 2026), https://data.ny.gov/Transportation/MTA-Bus-Fare-Evasion-Beginning-2019/uv5h-dfhp/about_data, and Fare-Free Bus Pilot 1-Year Evaluation (June 2025), https://www.mta.info/document/177466.
CBC staff analysis of data from Metropolitan Transportation Authority, MTA Subway Hourly Ridership: Beginning 2025 (accessed January 21, 2026), https://data.ny.gov/Transportation/MTA-Subway-Hourly-Ridership-Beginning-2025/5wq4-mkjj/about_data, and MTA Bus Hourly Ridership: Beginning 2025 (accessed January 21, 2026), https://data.ny.gov/Transportation/MTA-Bus-Hourly-Ridership-Beginning-2025/gxb3-akrn/about_data.
CBC staff analysis of data from IPUMS USA, U.S. Census Bureau, 2024 American Community Survey One-Year Estimate (accessed January 12, 2026).
CBC staff analysis of data from Metropolitan Transportation Authority, MTA Subway Hourly Ridership: Beginning 2025 (accessed January 21, 2026), https://data.ny.gov/Transportation/MTA-Subway-Hourly-Ridership-Beginning-2025/5wq4-mkjj/about_data, and MTA Bus Hourly Ridership: Beginning 2025 (accessed January 21, 2026), https://data.ny.gov/Transportation/MTA-Bus-Hourly-Ridership-Beginning-2025/gxb3-akrn/about_data.
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Fare-Free Bus Pilot 1-Year Evaluation (June 2025)https://www.mta.info/document/177466.
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, FY 2025 MBTA Fare-Free Bus Report (March 2025), https://malegislature.gov/Bills/194/HD4638.pdf.
Merrimack Valley Transit Authority, MeVa Fare-Free Evaluation and Business Case: Final Report (February 2025), https://mevatransit.com/wp-content/uploads/2025/02/MeVa_Fare_Free_Analysis_02042025.pdf.
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Fare-Free Bus Pilot 1-Year Evaluation (June 2025), https://www.mta.info/document/177466.
Mariel Kirschen and others, Fare-Free Transit Evaluation Framework (The National Academies Press, 2023), https://www.nationalacademies.org/publications/26732.
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, “Subway and bus ridership for 2024” (2024), https://www.mta.info/agency/new-york-city-transit/subway-bus-ridership-2024.
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, MTA 2026 Final Proposed Budget: November Financial Plan 2026-2029 Volume 2 (November 2025), https://www.mta.info/document/192541.
Adam Schmidt, No Fare: The Costs of MTA Fare and Toll Evasion (Citizens Budget Commission, September 11, 2025), https://cbcny.org/research/no-fare.
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Fare-Free Bus Pilot 1-Year Evaluation (June 2025), https://www.mta.info/document/177466.
CBC staff analysis of Metropolitan Transportation Authority, MTA 2026 Final Proposed Budget: November Financial Plan 2026-2029 Volume 2 (November 2025), https://www.mta.info/document/192541. Paratransit operating expenses are subtracted from the New York City Transit and MTA Bus Company sheets to determine the cost of operating the subway and bus system. Cash transfers from MTA Bridges and Tunnels are assumed to cover the cost of the subway and bus operations before paying for additional paratransit operating deficits. 
City of New York, “Fair Fares NYC” (accessed January 21, 2026), https://www.nyc.gov/site/fairfares/index.page.
Office of the New York City Comptroller, Checkbook NYC: Data Feeds (accessed October 28, 2025).
City of New York, Fair Fares Enrollees (January 21, 2026), https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Social-Services/Fair-Fares-Enrollees/3tw8-6si8/explore; and IPUMS USA, U.S. Census Bureau, 2024 American Community Survey One-Year Estimate (accessed January 12, 2026).
CBC staff analysis of data from Metropolitan Transportation Authority, MTA Subway Hourly Ridership: Beginning 2025 (accessed January 21, 2026), https://data.ny.gov/Transportation/MTA-Subway-Hourly-Ridership-Beginning-2025/5wq4-mkjj/about_data, and MTA Bus Hourly Ridership: Beginning 2025 (accessed January 21, 2026), https://data.ny.gov/Transportation/MTA-Bus-Hourly-Ridership-Beginning-2025/gxb3-akrn/about_data.
CBC staff analysis of data from IPUMS USA, U.S. Census Bureau, 2024 American Community Survey One-Year Estimate (accessed January 12, 2026).
“Lower-income New Yorkers” are defined in this instance as households making less than $50,000 per year, the two lowest income categories available in the survey. CBC staff analysis of data from New York City Department of Transportation, Citywide Mobility Survey – Person 2024 (accessed April 23, 2026), https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Transportation/Citywide-Mobility-Survey-Person-2024/i2im-iqtt/about_data, and Citywide Mobility Survey – Household 2024 (accessed April 23, 2026), https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Transportation/Citywide-Mobility-Survey-Household-2024/5mb3-padx/about_data.
CBC staff analysis of data from IPUMS USA, U.S. Census Bureau, 2024 American Community Survey One-Year Estimate (accessed January 12, 2026); City of New York, Fair Fares Enrollees (accessed April 28, 2026), https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Social-Services/Fair-Fares-Enrollees/3tw8-6si8/explore; and Metropolitan Transportation Authority, MTA Subway Hourly Ridership: Beginning 2025 (accessed January 21, 2026), https://data.ny.gov/Transportation/MTA-Subway-Hourly-Ridership-Beginning-2025/5wq4-mkjj/about_data,and MTA Bus Hourly Ridership: Beginning 2025 (accessed January 21, 2026), https://data.ny.gov/Transportation/MTA-Bus-Hourly-Ridership-Beginning-2025/gxb3-akrn/about_data.
One adult working 40 hours a week for 50 weeks a year at $17.00 an hour would earn $34,000. For a two-earner household with two children, this would be 18 percent less than 250 percent of the FPL for a family of four. For a one-person household, full-time minimum wage earnings are 15 percent lower than 250 percent of the FPL. 
Kara Gurl and others, Universal Affordable Transit for New York (Permanent Citizens Advisory Committee to the MTA, Community Service Society, and Riders Alliance, December 2025), https://pcac.org/report/fairfares26/.  
New York City Department of Transportation, Better Buses Action Plan (April 2019), https://www.nyc.gov/html/brt/downloads/pdf/better-buses-action-plan-2019.pdf.
CBC staff analysis of data from IPUMS USA, U.S. Census Bureau, 2024 American Community Survey One-Year Estimate (accessed January 12, 2026).
CBC staff analysis of data from IPUMS USA, U.S. Census Bureau, 2024 American Community Survey One-Year Estimate (accessed January 12, 2026).
CBC staff analysis of data from Office of the New York City Comptroller, Checkbook NYC: Data Feeds (accessed October 28, 2025); Metropolitan Transportation Authority, MTA Subway Hourly Ridership: Beginning 2025 (accessed January 21, 2026), https://data.ny.gov/Transportation/MTA-Subway-Hourly-Ridership-Beginning-2025/5wq4-mkjj/about_data, and MTA Bus Hourly Ridership: Beginning 2025 (accessed January 21, 2026), https://data.ny.gov/Transportation/MTA-Bus-Hourly-Ridership-Beginning-2025/gxb3-akrn/about_data.