===== SOURCE: landing page =====
Innovative Ideas. Independent Policy.
•
Home
•
About
•
Research
•
Events
•
Press
•
Impact
•
Support
•
Contact
Report
- August 2026
Harnessing NYC’s Natural Areas
New York City’s 12,000 acres of natural areas can improve public health, strengthen communities, and build climate resilience, yet remain overlooked and underused. Our research suggests that realizing more of that potential may depend on continued investment in staffing and maintenance, stronger awareness and wayfinding, and new approaches to programming, partnerships, and long-term funding.
by John Surico and Eli Dvorkin
Tags:
public health
natural areas
• Read the full report here.
• Read the policy ideas here.
N ew Yorkers are more stressed, more screen-bound, and more disconnected than ever, and one of the most effective antidotes is hiding in plain sight: the more than 12,000 acres of city-managed forests, wetlands, streams, and other wild landscapes woven across the five boroughs. 1 From the wooded trails of Central Park’s North Woods to the salt marshes of Jamaica Bay, the forests of Staten Island’s Greenbelt, and the rocky shoreline of Pelham Bay Park, New York City boasts a treasure trove of natural areas. These local assets provide access to nature for the millions of New Yorkers without the means to visit hiking trails or waterfronts in the Hudson Valley, Long Island, or other parts of the surrounding region.
But despite their scale and potential, the city’s natural areas remain largely invisible and underused. While about half of New Yorkers use the city’s public parks each week, far fewer are experiencing the city’s natural areas. Only about 380,000 New Yorkers—about 4.5 percent of the city’s population—participated in nature-based programming in 2024, including programming offered by NYC Parks, according to a survey of over two dozen entities conducted for this report. 2  And because many are repeat visitors, the share is likely even lower.
Even in the city’s most prominent natural landscapes, engagement is limited: In Jamaica Bay, only about 4 percent of park activity is tied to nature-focused uses like hiking or birding. 3 Among young New Yorkers, the gap is even more pronounced, with programs like Trail Blazers reporting that up to 80 percent of participants do not regularly access green space, even when they live nearby.
For many residents, especially in lower-income communities and communities of color, spending time in nature can feel like a largely inaccessible luxury. According to the educators and youth development practitioners interviewed for this report, many young New Yorkers go their entire childhoods without ever setting foot in one of the city’s forests, wetlands, or other natural areas. Part of the challenge is physical proximity: Fewer than half of all New Yorkers live within walking distance of a natural area, and more than 2.2 million residents live in neighborhoods with none at all. 4 But our interviews with community leaders suggest that cultural perceptions and questions of who feels welcome in these spaces also play a role.
Where lower-income New Yorkers are accessing these spaces, it is often through community-based nonprofits. But where these programs exist, demand far exceeds capacity. At the Hood Hikers, a community-based organization that organizes hiking trips centered on Black and Brown residents, membership has grown to more than 5,000 since its founding in 2020, and every event sells out. At Shorewalkers, a long-running nonprofit that leads group walks and hikes across the city using public transit, the annual Great Saunter around Manhattan now draws thousands of participants and fills up in less than a day. (This year saw 3,500 walkers on the route, and another 3,000 on the waitlist.) And at the Sebago Canoe Club in Canarsie—a volunteer-run organization offering free kayaking and waterfront access along Jamaica Bay—staff and volunteers regularly struggle to accommodate waitlists.
At the same time, New York City’s natural areas are under growing strain, and receiving less support. Although these landscapes make up roughly one-third of all parkland, they receive just 2 percent of the city’s parks operating budget. 5 The city’s capacity to care for these spaces has declined sharply: Acres maintained have fallen from 1,224 in fiscal year (FY) 2023 to 569 in FY 2025—a drop of more than 50 percent in two years—while tree planting in natural areas has also declined significantly. 6 Last year, just 4.7 percent of natural areas received any maintenance, and the entire system is managed by just 102 staff.
To its credit, NYC Parks and its partners have built important foundations to expand access and care. Urban Park Rangers and Stewardship programs have long connected New Yorkers to the city’s wild spaces; the Natural Areas Conservancy (NAC) has advanced trail planning and restoration; and the city recently released its first-ever Urban Forest Plan. But the scale of need now far exceeds the resources available. Our research suggests that realizing the promise and potential of the city’s natural areas for the benefit of all New Yorkers will require sustained investment in staffing and maintenance, stronger awareness and wayfinding, and new approaches to programming, partnerships, and funding—including tapping private and philanthropic support alongside public dollars. This report advances research on the state of the natural areas care and access ecosystem, and surfaces ideas from that research to ensure every New Yorker can experience meaningful time in nature without leaving the city.
Research for this report, supported by a grant from The Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust, draws on interviews with more than 65 parks leaders, natural areas advocates, environmental education organizations, community-based nonprofits, parks and open space alliances, and stewardship groups across the five boroughs. The research is also informed by an extensive analysis of public data from NYC Parks and other sources.
New York City’s natural areas may be one of its most untapped assets. They offer a rare combination of benefits that are especially important in a city like New York. A growing body of research shows that time in nature—even as little as 15 minutes—can reduce stress, improve mood, and support mental health, with the strongest benefits linked to more immersive settings like urban forests. 7 These impacts are especially pronounced for young people, at a time when nearly 40 percent of New York City high school students report feeling persistently sad or hopeless, the highest rate on record. 8
Natural areas also serve as living classrooms, offering hands-on environmental education and workforce pathways, while playing a critical role in mitigating climate impacts, from absorbing stormwater to reducing extreme heat. And at a time when the city feels more unaffordable than ever, these spaces offer one of the few opportunities for New Yorkers to access meaningful recreation and respite at no cost.
They also play a critical role in addressing environmental inequities. In neighborhoods along the Bronx River, for example, natural areas help mitigate the impacts of pollution, extreme heat, and noise from nearby highways, providing measurable improvements to both environmental and public health conditions. “When you go into a thicket of trees, that changes,” says Victoria Toro, outreach manager of the Bronx River Alliance, a nonprofit that cares for and programs activities on the Bronx River. “Natural areas mitigate the extreme heat, pollution, and noise that is so damaging to people’s mental and physical health. And these spaces are cleaning the air, too. We’re full of these hidden gems that people don’t know how to physically get to.”
Indeed, despite the many benefits provided by the city’s natural areas, access remains highly inconsistent, and too few New Yorkers are even aware of them.
A new Center for an Urban Future analysis finds that fewer than half of all New Yorkers—47.7 percent, or about 4.2 million people—live within a 10-minute walk of a natural area, compared to more than 84 percent who live within walking distance of a park. 9 Our analysis also found that just over a quarter of New Yorkers—26.1 percent, or roughly 2.2 million people—live in City Council districts without access to natural areas at all. Even along the city’s extensive coastline, access is limited: Of 520 miles of waterfront, only about 40 percent is publicly accessible.
Even where natural areas exist nearby, many New Yorkers remain unaware of them. In Manhattan’s Inwood Hill Park, which contains one of the city’s last remaining old-growth forests, Elizabeth Jaeger, former deputy director of the NAC, recalls working with a local videographer to capture its trail system. “He said, ‘This was an easy job for me, I live in Inwood Hill,’” she says. “I said, ‘That’s great, you must love coming to this park.’ He told me he had never been there.” The experience is not unusual. “In almost every workshop we do, we hear the same thing,” Jaeger says.
This gap between proximity and awareness means that even in neighborhoods with access to natural areas, many residents are not benefiting from them—underscoring the need not only to expand access, but to make these spaces more visible and welcoming to the communities they serve.
While most New Yorkers still do not regularly access the city’s natural areas, those who could benefit most are often the least likely to do so.
At NYC Outward Bound Schools, which fosters adventurous learning through real-world engagement and meaningful challenge in schools and the outdoors, staff report that many participants are visiting major parks and natural areas for the first time, even when they live nearby. Despite New York City’s abundance of green space, many of the students the program serves do not experience natural areas as truly accessible. “For many young people, it’s actually the first time they’ve been there,” says Cal Hastings, the organization’s vice president of partnerships and innovation. “Experiences in nature are essential, because they help young people—and all of us—disconnect from technology, reconnect with one another, and benefit from the restorative power of the natural world.”
Time constraints, work schedules, and caregiving responsibilities all present real barriers, particularly for residents in communities of color. “As far as adults, they’re working a lot, they’re taking care of people,” says Jasmine Guadalupe, founder of the Hood Hikers. Guadalupe adds that there are deeper barriers around who feels welcome in outdoor spaces: “For decades, [outdoor recreation] has been a predominantly white field,” she said in a 2024 interview. “Inner-city people might say, ‘You are going hiking? That’s for white people.’”
These challenges are especially pronounced for younger New Yorkers and working families. At Trail Blazers, a nonprofit that provides outdoor education and camping experiences for about 1,300 low-income children annually, up to 50 percent of their 400 after-school students enrolled do not regularly go to a green space. “At one school that we work with in Little Haiti, most of the students are new immigrants or live in the homeless shelter down the block,” says Shanna Gumaer, Trail Blazers’ executive director. There, the rate is as high as 80 percent. “It’s a total green desert and not convenient to go to a park, especially when their parents are working two or three jobs. It’s a real challenge for these families.”
Our research focuses on five interconnected challenges that help explain why relatively few New Yorkers are using the city’s natural areas.
• Too few young New Yorkers are getting meaningful exposure to nature.
• Concerns about safety and belonging discourage many New Yorkers from visiting natural areas.
• Transit and connectivity challenges make many natural areas difficult to reach.
• Chronic underinvestment leaves many natural areas understaffed and undermaintained.
• Climate change is increasing pressure on natural areas.
Ensuring that far more New Yorkers can benefit from time spent in the city’s wild places is an achievable goal. Our research suggests that this will require additional maintenance and staffing, expanded programming and partnerships with community-based organizations, and new efforts to raise awareness of what exists right here in the city. Another key opportunity is to develop new, dedicated sources of funding to support a new era for New York City’s natural areas, including models that harness private and philanthropic support, such as partnerships with outdoor retailers to help maintain trails and steward these spaces. Employers—from health care organizations and financial firms to schools and city agencies—can also help drive awareness and access by bringing their employees to the city’s natural areas for offsites and retreats.
Recent experience shows that these investments can work. Since 2019, temporary and seasonal Urban Park Ranger positions have helped NYC Parks expand nature walks, wildlife programming, youth activities, and skills-building events. In FY 2027, those roles have finally been baselined, rather than being funding one year at a time. When resources are available, NYC Parks can effectively expand access and engagement. The challenge now is sustaining and building on that momentum.
At the same time, city leaders can do far more to connect New Yorkers to nature at scale, including piloting monthly “Nature Days” that bring thousands of residents into parks; launching a five-borough awareness campaign; expanding access through transit and trails; and ensuring every public school student has regular opportunities to experience the outdoors. Equipped with a willingness to think creatively about how New Yorkers discover and use these spaces, the city can better harness the power of nature for both its ecosystems and its residents—and build a more accessible, widely used system of natural areas across the five boroughs.
 
The following are policy ideas in response to the challenges:
“Nature for All NYC"
While the Department of Education has made progress on sustainability education, much more can be done. New York City could make outdoor learning universal with a “Nature for All NYC” initiative that could ensure that every public school student participates in a nature-based experience each year with expanded field trips, increased Ranger and educator visits—including sending Rangers to visit public school classrooms—and support for partnerships with nonprofits and other agencies. One idea surfaced through this research is for the city to start with fourth graders, mirroring the federal Every Kid Outdoors initiative, and work with New York City Public Schools to develop a nature curriculum with an outdoors component. This initiative could build on the success of a current Parks-Schools partnership, Swim for Life, which focuses on teaching second graders how to swim. Over time, this would make outdoor learning a regular part of every student’s experience, helping to build familiarity, confidence, and long-term engagement.
Increasing perceptions of safety and belonging via Urban Park Rangers
Safety concerns remain a major barrier to visiting natural areas, particularly for women and people of color. Many of these spaces are lightly trafficked and lack a consistent public presence, reinforcing perceptions that they are unsafe or unwelcoming. Expanding access will require more than enforcement alone: It will take a regular, visible presence from staff who can welcome visitors, lead programming, answer questions, and help New Yorkers feel comfortable exploring these spaces.
Our research suggests that one high-potential option for policymakers is to strengthen the capacity and role of Urban Park Rangers in natural areas, creating a more consistent and visible human presence in the park system’s less-trafficked areas. This strategy could enable Rangers to spend more time building public confidence, guiding visitors, leading programs, and supporting safe use of wild places. NYC Parks could also explore creating a dedicated natural areas safety team, with consistent assignments in forests, wetlands, trails, and waterfront spaces. Together, a stronger Ranger presence and a specialized safety team could increase visibility, and help break the cycle of underuse that keeps many natural areas feeling isolated.
Piloting citywide “Nature Days”
To address the barriers that prevent many New Yorkers from accessing the city's natural areas, the city could pilot a bold, highly visible initiative such as a series of monthly, citywide “Nature Days” during the warmer months. On select weekends, NYC Parks—working with the Department of Transportation and the MTA—could coordinate enhanced access through shuttle buses, expanded transit service, guided hikes, and family-friendly events. A one-year pilot would allow the city to test demand, identify high-interest sites, and build the case for permanent improvements to access and programming.
Planning for the long-term care needs of NYC’s natural areas
For years, the capital and expense dollars committed to the city's natural areas have not kept up with maintenance needs or rising demand, even as these spaces face mounting pressures from climate change and increased usage. In addition to reckoning with the true cost of effective natural areas care and maintenance, New York City will need more creative approaches to closing the gap between current capacity and the scale of need across more than 12,000 acres of natural areas. Public-private partnerships, philanthropic support, and state tourism and environmental funding streams could all play a larger role in that effort. A five-year roadmap could help align existing programs and partners, identify promising models, and establish clear goals for acreage maintained, visitor participation, programming, and long-term stewardship. Such an effort could bring public, nonprofit, private, and philanthropic stakeholders together to support a new era of access to nature.
Modernizing the city’s 300-plus miles of trails
Trails are essential to making natural areas accessible, providing safe pathways through ecologically sensitive environments and helping visitors navigate unfamiliar terrain. The city could strengthen the current network by conducting a reassessment of its existing trail system to identify routes that are difficult to find, informal, or ecologically harmful. This effort could identify which trails need sustained maintenance, improved signage, formalization, rerouting, or closure, while also exploring carefully targeted opportunities to improve access where trails can be added without harming natural areas. At the same time, NYC Parks could partner with private sector firms and nonprofit experts to modernize trail maps, digital navigation tools, and wayfinding, making it easier for residents to discover and explore the city’s natural spaces safely and responsibly.
Unlocking benefits for youth and natural areas in one
Youth unemployment in New York City remains more than double the citywide average and has risen in recent years, even as many young New Yorkers face elevated rates of loneliness, anxiety, and other mental health challenges. At the same time, the city’s forests, wetlands, trails, and shorelines need far more hands-on care than current staffing levels can provide. NYC Parks already operates promising youth stewardship programs, including the Urban Park Rangers’ Ranger Conservation Corps, a free eight-week environmental conservation internship that serves roughly 200 high school students annually, as well as Natural Resources Group youth and young adult internships supported in part through the city’s Summer Youth Employment Program. But these efforts remain far smaller than the scale of the opportunity.
A larger “NYC Youth Conservation Corps” could build on these foundations by connecting more youth employment opportunities to natural areas stewardship, with paid placements focused on trail building and maintenance, tree care, horticulture, habitat restoration, shoreline stewardship, and visitor engagement. Participants could be placed with NYC Parks, the NAC, other conservancies, and community-based partners across the five boroughs. Corps members could also help introduce more young New Yorkers to the city’s natural areas through peer-to-peer outreach and social media campaigns—something like “Trail Teens of TikTok”—spotlighting nearby hikes, waterfronts, forests, and volunteer opportunities in ways that feel authentic to their generation. The strongest programs would not end with a summer paycheck: They would connect participants to year-round jobs, apprenticeships, college programs, and industry-recognized credentials in forestry, horticulture, ecological restoration, landscape management, and natural resource careers. By scaling proven models and linking immediate work experience to real advancement opportunities, New York City could build the next generation of stewards for its natural areas while creating meaningful pathways to economic mobility.
Library-based “Nature & Culture Hubs”
Our research suggests that information gaps seriously limit participation in nature-based activities, restricting potential community benefits. One promising option to address those gaps is to utilize public libraries, which are already among the most trusted institutions in the city. Despite boasting locations in every neighborhood and strong relationships with residents, they remain an underutilized asset when it comes to connecting New Yorkers to nearby nature, outdoor recreation, and cultural life. With the right resources and partnerships, libraries could serve as neighborhood gateways to parks, trails, waterfronts, gardens, cultural organizations, performances, public art, historic sites, and other low-cost opportunities close to where New Yorkers live.
A network of “Nature & Culture Hubs” at libraries, particularly in underserved communities, could start with a simple but important function: providing clear, accessible information about local nature-based activities, nearby access points, transit routes, volunteer opportunities, free and low-cost cultural events, and neighborhood arts and heritage programming. Over time, these hubs could also offer lendable equipment, small grants for programming, and partnerships with local organizations to expand access. They could support community co-design of programming, ensuring that activities reflect local cultures and needs while helping residents feel a stronger sense of ownership over nearby natural and cultural assets.
“NYC Nature-Based Jobs Coalition”
While New York City is training hundreds of residents each year for jobs in natural areas, it has far fewer stable positions to absorb them. This mismatch reflects a lack of stable career-track positions to move into, not a lack of interest or training. Without more stable roles in maintenance, stewardship, restoration, and programming, the city will continue to fall short of both the workforce needed to care for these spaces and the jobs needed to make training a meaningful pathway to economic mobility.
One promising approach would be to expand stable, long-term roles connected to natural areas stewardship while reducing reliance on fragmented short-term contracts where possible. At the same time, a “New York City Nature-Based Jobs Coalition” could build on the work of Forest for All NYC and Just Nature NYC to better coordinate training, apprenticeships, credentials, and hiring across the growing field of natural areas stewardship. The coalition could align training programs with apprenticeships, industry-recognized credentials, degree pathways, and real hiring needs—especially for roles like arborist, horticultural technician, trail specialist, and natural resource manager, where hands-on experience is essential. By organizing clearer routes into these roles and better matching training to hiring demand, New York City could build a workforce that supports both environmental goals and economic mobility.
“Explore Forever Wild NYC”
In interviews for this report, lack of awareness emerged as one of the most consistent barriers, even among longtime residents who had never visited nearby natural areas. Without a coordinated effort to raise visibility, these spaces will remain underused.
The city could launch a five-borough awareness campaign—“Explore Forever Wild NYC”—to promote natural areas across subways, buses, LinkNYC kiosks, schools, and digital platforms. Working with Empire State Development, NYC Parks could tap into existing state tourism dollars and align messaging with the “I Love NY” campaign. This effort should be paired with improved wayfinding, updated trail maps, and digital tools to help residents navigate the city’s 300 miles of trails.
Bring nature closer to where New Yorkers live with “Rewild NYC”
To close physical proximity gaps when it comes to natural areas, New York City could launch a bold interagency initiative—“Rewild NYC”—to expand access through pocket forests, native plantings, and micronatural spaces. This could include transforming vacant lots, dead-end streets, and roadway medians; expanding Greenstreets; and incorporating natural elements into schools, libraries, and public housing. These smaller-scale interventions can bring meaningful environmental and public health benefits to neighborhoods that currently lack access. The proposed “NYC Youth Conservation Corps” could help maintain and steward these newly greened spaces, giving young New Yorkers paid, hands-on experience while ensuring these investments are cared for over time.
As cities around the world are experimenting with ways to integrate natural systems into the urban fabric, the benefits of nature—cooling, biodiversity, mental health—can be delivered through smaller, distributed interventions to bring nature closer to where New Yorkers live. Such initiatives are especially important given that a quarter of New Yorkers live in neighborhoods without access to natural areas, and creating large new parks is often impractical in dense parts of the city.
Endnotes
1  Natural Areas Conservancy, “NYC Nature Map,” 2024, https://naturalareasnyc.org/nyc-nature-map/.
2  Center for an Urban Future analysis of programming data provided to CUF by program providers, and participant numbers taken from each organization’s website. 2026.
3  United States Forest Service, “Reading the Landscape: A Social Assessment of Parks and Their Natural Areas in Jamaica Bay Communities,” 2015, https://www.nycgovparks.org/pagefiles/207/wp1JamaicaBaySSA2013__6818c167610da.pdf.
4  CUF analysis of data from the Natural Areas Conservancy and Census Block Maps.
5  Natural Areas Conservancy, Funding Forested Natural Areas: Recent Trends in New York City , 2023, https://naturalareasnyc.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/01/NAC-Funding-Forested-Natural-Areas.pdf.
6  The City of New York, Mayor’s Management Report , 2025, https://www.nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/pdf/mmr2025/2025_mmr.pdf.
7  Marcia P. Jimenez et al., “Associations between Nature Exposure and Health: A Review of the Evidence," International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 18, no. 9 (2021): 4790, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18094790.
8  New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, "Suicide-related factors among New York City Public High School Students," Epi Data Brief, no 138 (November 2023), https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doh/downloads/pdf/epi/databrief138.pdf.
9  CUF analysis of data from the Natural Areas Conservancy and Census Block Maps.
Harnessing NYC’s Natural Areas is a publication of the Center for an Urban Future. Researched and written by John Surico and Eli Dvorkin. Edited by Dorian Block and Irene Connelly. Data analysis by Rachel Neches. Additional research by Harry Frahn, Zamira Frost, Bella Hung, Nora Lewis, Yona Litwin, Lina Mazioui, Julia Ross, and Samuel Weidman. Designed by Stislow Design.
Center for an Urban Future (CUF) is a leading New York City-based think tank that generates smart and sustainable public policies to reduce inequality, increase economic mobility, and grow the economy.
This report was made possible by a grant from The Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust . Any opinions, findings, or recommendations expressed in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of our funders.
General operating support for the Center for an Urban Future has been provided by The Clark Foundation , Robin Hood , and the Altman Foundation . We are also grateful for support from Fisher Brothers Foundation for the Center for an Urban Future’s Middle Class Jobs Project, and ongoing support from a number of other philanthropic funders.
Cover photo credit:  Jamaica Bay-Rockaway Parks Conservancy.
Related Press
NYC Has 12,000 Acres of Forests, Wetlands & Other Natural Areas. Many Lifelong New Yorkers Don’t Know They Exist.
City Limits ,
by Jeanmarie Evelly,
August 06, 2026
Report: New Yorkers lack access to city’s natural spaces
Spectrum News NY1 ,
by Erin Billups,
August 23, 2026
This organization hosts hiking trips centered around Black and Brown New Yorkers
Bronx Mama ,
August 14, 2026
This report was made possible by a grant from The Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust . Any opinions, findings, or recommendations expressed in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of our funders.
Related Publications
7831|7647|7478|7394|7358|7332
•
10 Ideas for Expanding Equitable Access to Natural Areas
•
Putting the “Rec” Back in NYC Parks & Recreation
•
The Park Queens Deserves
•
Expanding Concession Opportunities in NYC’s Parks
•
New York City’s Green Economy Opportunity
•
Enacting a Ticket Surcharge to Strengthen New York City’s Parks
Related Press
NYC Has 12,000 Acres of Forests, Wetlands & Other Natural Areas. Many Lifelong New Yorkers Don’t Know They Exist.
City Limits
Report: New Yorkers lack access to city’s natural spaces
Spectrum News NY1
This organization hosts hiking trips centered around Black and Brown New Yorkers
Bronx Mama
View More Related Press
Related Press
NYC Has 12,000 Acres of Forests, Wetlands & Other Natural Areas. Many Lifelong New Yorkers Don’t Know They Exist.
City Limits
Report: New Yorkers lack access to city’s natural spaces
Spectrum News NY1
This organization hosts hiking trips centered around Black and Brown New Yorkers
Bronx Mama
We're Hiring
Managing Editor
Search
@nycfuture
Follow @nycfuture
CUF in the News
Changing Careers: New York City Expands Free College Tuition Program for Adults
Forum Daily New York
Mayor Zohran Mamdani doubles individual artist grants in New York City to $10,000
Artsy
New York expands free SUNY and CUNY tuition to those with college degrees
News 10 ABC
Should AI Be Regulated City by City? New York Should Think Carefully Before Answering
AlleyWatch
New York’s retail storefront strategy: cut it in half
The Real Deal
Mamdani Doubles Grants for NYC Artists
Hyperallergic
Cost of retirement on Long Island squeezing seniors, forcing them to cut back
Newsday
View More Press
•
© All Rights Reserved.
Content
• Reports • Commentary/Op-Ed • Testimony • Data • Events • Impact
Topics
• Economic Growth • Economic Opportunity • Entrepreneurship • Immigrants • Boroughs • Small Business • Human Capital • Higher Education • Creative Economy • Tech
Follow
Support
• Internships
• Support the Center
• Contact
Center for an
Urban Future
80 Eighth Avenue, Suite 704
New York, NY 10011
212-479-3344
[email protected]
© All Rights Reserved.
x

===== SOURCE: report PDF =====
AUGUST 2026
Harnessing  
NYC’s Natural Areas
Connecting New Yorkers  
to the City’s Wild Places
Harnessing NYC’s Natural Areas  is a 
publication of the Center for an Urban Future. 
Researched and written by John Surico and  
Eli Dvorkin. Edited by Dorian Block and Irene 
Connelly. Data analysis by Rachel Neches. 
Additional research by Harry Frahn, Zamira 
Frost, Bella Hung, Nora Lewis, Yona Litwin,  
Lina Mazioui, Julia Ross, and Samuel Weidman. 
Designed by Stislow Design.
Center for an Urban Future (CUF) is a leading 
think tank focused on building a stronger  
and more equitable economy in New York City, 
and expanding economic opportunity for all 
New Yorkers.
 
Funded by a grant from The Leona M. and Harry 
B. Helmsley Charitable Trust. Any opinions, 
findings, or recommendations expressed in this 
report are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of our funders.
General operating support for the Center  
for an Urban Future has been provided by  
The Clark Foundation, Robin Hood, and the 
Altman Foundation.
 
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Jonathan Bowles
EDITORIAL & POLICY DIRECTOR
Eli Dvorkin
CHIEF OF STAFF
Stephanie Arevalo
SENIOR DATA & POLICY RESEARCHER
Rachel Neches 
SENIOR FELLOW FOR CLIMATE & OPPORTUNITY
John Surico 
POLICY RESEARCHER
Alejandra Díaz-Pizarro
RESEARCH AND OPERATIONS ASSOCIATE
Sophia Tumolo 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Gifford Miller (Chairman)
Jonathan Bowles 
Rafael E. Cestero 
Russell Dubner 
Garnesha Ezediaro 
Susan Fine 
Kyle Kimball 
Katy Knight 
Jessie Lazarus 
David Lebenstein 
Eric S. Lee 
Josh Moskowitz 
Monisha Nariani 
Max Neukirchen 
Andrew Reicher 
Peter Schubert 
John Siegal 
Thomas Vecchione 
Sherry Wang 
Kate Wittels
Cover Photo: Jamaica Bay-Rockaway 
Parks Conservancy

Harnessing NYC’s Natural Areas: 
Connecting New Yorkers to the City’s Wild Places
Introduction ..............................................................  1
NYC Faces Major Challenges in Connecting New Yorkers to Natural Areas .......... 5
Why Time in Nature Matters for New Yorkers  ................................  13
NYC Is Making Progress on Natural Areas, But Significant Gaps Remain  .........  15 
Best Practices: Maximizing Benefits of NYC’s Natural Areas  ...................  18
Conclusion .............................................................  20
Table of Contents
1
HARNESSING NYC’S NATURAL AREAS1
Harnessing NYC’s Natural Areas:  
Connecting New Yorkers to the City’s  
Wild Places
1
NEW YORKERS ARE MORE STRESSED, MORE SCREEN-BOUND, AND MORE DISCONNECTED THAN EVER, AND ONE OF  
the most effective antidotes is hiding in plain sight: the more than 12,000 acres of city-managed forests, wetlands, streams, 
and other wild landscapes woven across the five boroughs.1 From the wooded trails of Central Park’s North Woods to the salt 
marshes of Jamaica Bay, the forests of Staten Island’s Greenbelt, and the rocky shoreline of Pelham Bay Park, New York City 
boasts a treasure trove of natural areas. These local assets provide access to nature for the millions of New Yorkers without 
the means to visit hiking trails or waterfronts in the Hudson Valley, Long Island, or other parts of the surrounding region.
But despite their scale and potential, the city’s natural areas remain largely invisible and underused. While about half 
of New Yorkers use the city’s public parks each week, far fewer are experiencing the city’s natural areas. Only about 
380,000 New Yorkers—about 4.5 percent of the city’s population—participated in nature-based programming in 2024,  
including programming offered by NYC Parks, according to a survey of over two dozen entities conducted for this report.2 And 
because many are repeat visitors, the share is likely even lower. 
Even in the city’s most prominent natural landscapes, engagement is limited: In Jamaica Bay, only about 4 percent  
of park activity is tied to nature-focused uses like hiking or birding. 3 Among young New Yorkers, the gap is even more  
pronounced, with programs like Trail Blazers reporting that up to 80 percent of participants do not regularly access green 
space, even when they live nearby. 
For many residents, especially in lower-income communities and communities of color, spending time in nature can 
feel like a largely inaccessible luxury. According to the educators and youth development practitioners interviewed for this 
report, many young New Yorkers go their entire childhoods without ever setting foot in one of the city’s forests, wetlands, or 
other natural areas. Part of the challenge is physical proximity: Fewer than half of all New Yorkers live within walking  
distance of a natural area, and more than 2.2 million residents live in neighborhoods with none at all.4 But our interviews with 
community leaders suggest that cultural perceptions and questions of who feels welcome in these spaces also play a role. 
Where lower-income New Yorkers are accessing these spaces, it is often through community-based nonprofits. But 
where these programs exist, demand far exceeds capacity. At the Hood Hikers, a community-based organization that  
organizes hiking trips centered on Black and Brown residents, membership has grown to more than 5,000 since its founding 
in 2020, and every event sells out. At Shorewalkers, a long-running nonprofit that leads group walks and hikes across the 
city using public transit, the annual Great Saunter around Manhattan now draws thousands of participants and fills up in 
less than a day. (This year saw 3,500 walkers on the route, and another 3,000 on the waitlist.) And at the Sebago Canoe 
Club in Canarsie—a volunteer-run organization offering free kayaking and waterfront access along Jamaica Bay—staff and 
volunteers regularly struggle to accommodate waitlists.
At the same time, New York City’s natural areas are under growing strain, and receiving less support. Although these 
landscapes make up roughly one-third of all parkland, they receive just 2 percent of the city’s parks operating budget.5 The 
city’s capacity to care for these spaces has declined sharply: Acres maintained have fallen from 1,224 in fiscal year (FY)  
2023 to 569 in FY 2025—a drop of more than 50 percent in two years—while tree planting in natural areas has also declined 
significantly.6 Last year, just 4.7 percent of natural areas received any maintenance, and the entire system is managed by 
just 102 staff. 
To its credit, NYC Parks and its partners have built important foundations to expand access and care. Urban Park Rangers 
and Stewardship programs have long connected New Yorkers to the city’s wild spaces; the Natural Areas Conservancy (NAC) 
has advanced trail planning and restoration; and the city recently released its first-ever Urban Forest Plan. But the scale of 
need now far exceeds the resources available. Our research suggests that realizing the promise and potential of the city’s 
natural areas for the benefit of all New Yorkers will require sustained investment in staffing and maintenance, stronger 
awareness and wayfinding, and new approaches to programming, partnerships, and funding—including tapping private and 
philanthropic support alongside public dollars. This report advances research on the state of the natural areas care and 
access ecosystem, and surfaces ideas from that research to ensure every New Yorker can experience meaningful time in 
nature without leaving the city. 
2
HARNESSING NYC’S NATURAL AREAS
Only 4.5 percent of New Yorkers engaged with New York City nature-based  
programming in 2024
 
               
 
Source: CUF analysis of programming data provided to Center for an Urban Future by program providers, and participant 
numbers taken from each organization's website. 2026. Created with Datawrapper
Fewer than half of all New Yorkers live within a 10-minute walk of a natural area
 
               
 
 
 
Source: Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from the Natural Areas Conservancy and Census Block Maps

3
HARNESSING NYC’S NATURAL AREAS
Research for this report, supported by a grant from The  
Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust, draws on 
interviews with more than 65 parks leaders, natural areas 
advocates, environmental education organizations, commu-
nity-based nonprofits, parks and open space alliances, and 
stewardship groups across the five boroughs. The research 
is also informed by an extensive analysis of public data from 
NYC Parks and other sources.
New York City’s natural areas may be one of its most 
untapped assets. They offer a rare combination of benefits 
that are especially important in a city like New York. A grow-
ing body of research shows that time in nature—even as lit-
tle as 15 minutes—can reduce stress, improve mood, and 
support mental health, with the strongest benefits linked to 
more immersive settings like urban forests.7 These impacts 
are especially pronounced for young people, at a time when 
nearly 40 percent of New York City high school students  
report feeling persistently sad or hopeless, the highest rate 
on record.8
Natural areas also serve as living classrooms, offering 
hands-on environmental education and workforce pathways, 
while playing a critical role in mitigating climate impacts, 
from absorbing stormwater to reducing extreme heat. And at 
a time when the city feels more unaffordable than ever, these 
spaces offer one of the few opportunities for New Yorkers to 
access meaningful recreation and respite at no cost.
They also play a critical role in addressing environmen-
tal inequities. In neighborhoods along the Bronx River, for 
example, natural areas help mitigate the impacts of pollu -
tion, extreme heat, and noise from nearby highways, provid-
ing measurable improvements to both environmental and 
public health conditions. “When you go into a thicket of 
trees, that changes,” says Victoria Toro, outreach manager 
of the Bronx River Alliance, a nonprofit that cares for and 
programs activities on the Bronx River. “Natural areas miti -
gate the extreme heat, pollution, and noise that is so dam -
aging to people’s mental and physical health. And these 
spaces are cleaning the air, too. We’re full of these hidden 
gems that people don’t know how to physically get to.”
Indeed, despite the many benefits provided by the city’s 
natural areas, access remains highly inconsistent, and too 
few New Yorkers are even aware of them. 
A new Center for an Urban Future analysis finds that 
fewer than half of all New Yorkers—47.7 percent, or about 
4.2 million people—live within a 10-minute walk of a natural 
area, compared to more than 84 percent who live within 
walking distance of a park. 9 Our analysis also found that 
just over a quarter of New Yorkers—26.1 percent, or roughly 
2.2 million people—live in City Council districts without ac -
cess to natural areas at all. Even along the city’s extensive 
coastline, access is limited: Of 520 miles of waterfront, only 
about 40 percent is publicly accessible.
Even where natural areas exist nearby, many New York-
ers remain unaware of them. In Manhattan’s Inwood Hill 
Park, which contains one of the city’s last remaining old-
growth forests, Elizabeth Jaeger, former deputy director of 
the NAC, recalls working with a local videographer to cap -
ture its trail system. “He said, ‘This was an easy job for me, 
I live in Inwood Hill,’” she says. “I said, ‘That’s great, you 
must love coming to this park.’ He told me he had never 
been there.” The experience is not unusual. “In almost every 
workshop we do, we hear the same thing,” Jaeger says.
This gap between proximity and awareness means that 
even in neighborhoods with access to natural areas, many 
residents are not benefiting from them—underscoring the 
need not only to expand access, but to make these spaces 
more visible and welcoming to the communities they serve.
While most New Yorkers still do not regularly access the 
city’s natural areas, those who could benefit most are often 
the least likely to do so. 
At NYC Outward Bound Schools, which fosters adven -
turous learning through real-world engagement and mean -
ingful challenge in schools and the outdoors, staff report 
that many participants are visiting major parks and natural 
areas for the first time, even when they live nearby. Despite 
New York City’s abundance of green space, many of the stu-
dents the program serves do not experience natural areas 
as truly accessible. “For many young people, it’s actually the 
first time they’ve been there,” says Cal Hastings, the organi-
zation’s vice president of partnerships and innovation.  
“Experiences in nature are essential, because they help 
young people—and all of us—disconnect from technology, 
reconnect with one another, and benefit from the restor -
ative power of the natural world.”
Time constraints, work schedules, and caregiving  
responsibilities all present real barriers, particularly for res-
idents in communities of color. “As far as adults, they’re 
working a lot, they’re taking care of people,” says Jasmine 
Guadalupe, founder of the Hood Hikers. Guadalupe adds 
that there are deeper barriers around who feels welcome in 
outdoor spaces: “For decades, [outdoor recreation] has 
been a predominantly white field,” she said in a 2024 inter-
view. “Inner-city people might say, ‘You are going hiking? 
That’s for white people.’”
These challenges are especially pronounced for 
younger New Yorkers and working families. At Trail Blazers, 
a nonprofit that provides outdoor education and camping 
experiences for about 1,300 low-income children annually, 
up to 50 percent of their 400 after-school students  
enrolled do not regularly go to a green space. “At one 
school that we work with in Little Haiti, most of the  
students are new immigrants or live in the homeless  
shelter down the block,” says Shanna Gumaer, Trail  
Blazers’ executive director. There, the rate is as high as 80 
percent. “It’s a total green desert and not convenient to go 
4
HARNESSING NYC’S NATURAL AREAS
to a park, especially when their parents are working two or 
three jobs. It’s a real challenge for these families.”
Our research focuses on five interconnected challenges 
that help explain why relatively few New Yorkers are using 
the city’s natural areas. The five challenges, which we ana -
lyze in greater detail in the next section, include: 
  Too few young New Yorkers are getting  
meaningful exposure to nature.
  Concerns about safety and belonging discourage 
many New Yorkers from visiting natural areas.
  Transit and connectivity challenges make many 
natural areas difficult to reach.
  Chronic underinvestment leaves many natural 
areas understaffed and undermaintained.
  Climate change is increasing pressure  
on natural areas.
Ensuring that far more New Yorkers can benefit from time 
spent in the city’s wild places is an achievable goal. Our  
research suggests that this will require additional mainte -
nance and staffing, expanded programming and partnerships 
with community-based organizations, and new efforts to 
raise awareness of what exists right here in the city. Another 
key opportunity is to develop new, dedicated sources of 
funding to support a new era for New York City’s natural  
areas, including models that harness private and philan -
thropic support, such as partnerships with outdoor retailers 
to help maintain trails and steward these spaces. Employers— 
from health care organizations and financial firms to schools 
and city agencies—can also help drive awareness and  
access by bringing their employees to the city’s natural  
areas for offsites and retreats. 
Recent experience shows that these investments can 
work. Since 2019, temporary and seasonal Urban Park 
Ranger positions have helped NYC Parks expand nature 
walks, wildlife programming, youth activities, and skills-build-
ing events. In FY 2027, those roles have finally been  
baselined, rather than being funding one year at a time. When 
resources are available, NYC Parks can effectively expand 
access and engagement. The challenge now is sustaining 
and building on that momentum.
At the same time, city leaders can do far more to connect 
New Yorkers to nature at scale, including piloting monthly  
“Nature Days” that bring thousands of residents into parks; 
launching a five-borough awareness campaign; expanding 
access through transit and trails; and ensuring every public 
school student has regular opportunities to experience the 
outdoors. Equipped with a willingness to think creatively 
about how New Yorkers discover and use these spaces, 
the city can better harness the power of nature for both its 
ecosystems and its residents—and build a more accessible, 
widely used system of natural areas across the five boroughs.
People walking through Forest Park in Queens  
(Natural Areas Conservancy).
5
FROM LIMITED AWARENESS AND UNEVEN PROGRAMMING  
to barriers in transit, safety, and chronic underinvestment, a 
range of interconnected challenges continues to limit how—
and whether—New Yorkers access the city’s natural areas.
1. Too few young New Yorkers  
are getting meaningful exposure 
to nature.
Lower-income families and underresourced schools 
face significant gaps in access.
At the Queens School of Inquiry in Fresh Meadows, 
teacher Adam Zaid takes his students each month to near-
by Cunningham Park, home to ancient woodlands, kettle 
ponds, and glacial hills. After their first visit, students ask to 
return regularly. “Once you realize you can hike there, you 
are comfortable walking around the woods,” Zaid says. 
“We’ve gone to the same places and looked at the same 
things; the experience of calm you receive when being there 
is there for you always.”
At his school, Zaid organizes lessons and outings fo -
cused on natural areas as part of his role as a “sustainabil-
ity coordinator”—an extracurricular Department of Educa -
tion position meant to support sustainability curriculum and 
programming that he holds in addition to teaching. But his 
capacity to do this work is rare across the school system. 
“Most schools don’t allot this many teaching periods to the 
position,” he says. “Many teachers in the public schools are 
not even aware of the position.”
This gap reflects a broader underinvestment in access 
to nature for children, even as NYC Parks serves as a key 
asset in narrowing these gaps. Youth-focused programming 
from NYC Parks and partner organizations reaches about 
152,000 school-age New Yorkers—roughly 9 percent of the 
city’s under-18 population.10 Of these, only about one in five 
are spending time in the city’s wild places. While school-
aged children tend to participate in nature-based program -
ming at higher rates than New Yorkers overall, the vast  
majority still go without meaningful exposure. These school- 
based programs are especially important, as many families 
are not comfortable exploring nature on their own, and  
lower-income families often lack the time due to work and 
caregiving responsibilities.
Demand far exceeds capacity. Nearly 4,000 students 
participate in NYC Outward Bound Schools programs each 
year, yet requests outpace available slots. At the Alley Pond 
Park Environmental Center, demand is so high that pro -
grams book out within weeks. “We’re one of the few environ-
mental centers in Queens,” says executive director Irene 
Scheid. “One of our biggest issues is the waitlist—we’re 
booked for the whole school year in just a few weeks, and 
don’t have the space to expand. People are craving experi -
ential outdoor learning in New York City.”
Access is also shaped by school resources. “We get so 
much interest from private schools and schools with more 
resources,” says Andrea Parker, executive director of the 
Gowanus Canal Conservancy. “There’s just a huge need. We 
do a lot of outreach to Title I schools, but it’s a lot more dif-
ficult to get them to come out for field trips, which require 
resources such as buses and chaperones.”
Educators describe the system as fragmented and in -
consistent. “Ad hoc,” says Aurelia Casey, the Gowanus Ca -
nal Conservancy’s senior manager of youth programs. 
Teachers must know what programs exist and have the in -
stitutional support to participate, conditions that are far 
from guaranteed. To bridge that gap, the Conservancy funds 
professional development for teachers and expands access 
to programs along the canal, where students learn about 
local ecosystems, restoration, and water quality.
For many students, these experiences are transforma -
tive. “The students really find what they’re interested in,” Ca-
sey says. “Some like science; others don’t mind getting dirty. 
It can be eye-opening.” Casey herself was introduced to envi-
ronmental work through a youth environmental workforce 
program for teenagers. “I got into a lot of trouble as a teenag-
er,” she says. “But the minute I found this out—that I could 
make a living being outside—I became a total nerd for it.”
These disparities have long-term consequences. Re -
search suggests that children in wealthier neighborhoods 
are far more likely to visit natural areas than those in low -
er-income communities, patterns that tend to persist into 
adulthood.11 On Staten Island, where access to natural areas 
is more abundant, outdoor activity is more deeply ingrained. 
“You would routinely grow up knowing you could camp on 
Staten Island,” says Lynn Kelly, executive director of the New 
York Restoration Project and a Staten Island native.
NYC Faces Major Challenges in Connecting 
New Yorkers to Natural Areas
6
HARNESSING NYC’S NATURAL AREAS
Organizations across the city are working to close these 
gaps. Along Newtown Creek, educators introduce students 
to the history and restoration of one of the city’s most polluted 
waterways. “If you learn about the creek when you’re young, 
you’re much more likely to care about it,” says Willis Elkins, 
executive director of the Newtown Creek Alliance.
But these efforts remain limited by resources. “We 
know that teachers are overwhelmed in the classroom, and 
they find it very difficult to get kids out, but it’s not because 
they don’t want to,” says Chrissy Word, director of education 
at the City Parks Foundation. “What they look for often is 
free programming because schools have to prioritize many 
other things in their budgets, particularly special education 
services.” While organizations help subsidize costs, funding 
constraints persist, and asking parents to foot the bill for  
a school bus or activity fee can be a major limitation in  
lower-income districts.
Yet the potential impact is enormous. Exposure to  
nature at a young age is one of the strongest predictors of 
lifelong engagement,  and even small amounts of exposure 
can make a lasting difference. “It’s amazing what a tiny little 
bit of contact with nature does to a kid,” says Tamar Renaud, 
New York State director at the Trust for Public Land.
2. Concerns about safety and 
belonging discourage many New 
Yorkers from visiting natural areas.
Even when natural areas are accessible, many  
New Yorkers do not feel comfortable using them.
In the Bronx’s Pelham Bay Park—the city’s largest natu-
ral area—trainees in Green Applied Projects for Parks, a pro-
gram run by NYC Parks, often enter parts of the park they 
had previously avoided entirely. “Many had never been there 
or even knew there was a body of water there—they never 
hiked trails or canoed before,” says Liza Ehrlich, executive 
vice president and chief operating officer of the Horticultural 
Society of New York. “And it was just this constant drumbeat: 
‘Is this space for me? Am I going to get accused of a crime 
for being there? Am I going to get arrested?’ It’s really layered.” 
These concerns reflect a broader reality: For many New Yorkers, 
particularly those from marginalized communities, natural areas 
can feel unfamiliar or unwelcoming.
Throughout our research, interviewees point to a range 
of perceptions that discourage use. Not feeling welcome as 
a person of color—highlighted starkly in 2020, when a Black 
birder had the police called on him in Central Park—is cited 
repeatedly. For others, safety concerns loom large. “There’s 
a real mental block that one has,” says Kelly of the New York 
Restoration Project. “If I go for a run along this trail, and it’s 
isolating and there are no lights and I’m a female alone, I’m 
not going to do that.”
In some cases, these perceptions are reinforced by real 
conditions on the ground. During a recent visit to Forest 
Park, many lampposts along hiking trails were found to  
be  nonworking, a choice made to limit light pollution, but 
which also has the effect of reducing perceptions of safety. 
(The lampposts have been left in place while awaiting a  
capital funding allocation.) A more consistent presence of 
park staff could help address these concerns, but staffing  
remains highly constrained. In FY 2026, NYC Parks employs 
just 300 Parks Enforcement Patrol officers for approximately 
30,000 acres, leaving large areas of parkland with minimal 
coverage.
Addressing these barriers will require more than physical 
access improvements. Expanding staff presence, improving 
maintenance, installing lighting where appropriate, and  
fostering a stronger sense of community ownership will all 
be critical to making natural areas feel safe and welcoming. 
Policy Idea: “Nature for All NYC”
WHILE THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION HAS MADE PROGRESS ON SUSTAINABILITY EDUCATION, MUCH  
more can be done. New York City could make outdoor learning universal with a “Nature for All NYC” initiative that 
could ensure that every public school student participates in a nature-based experience each year with expanded 
field trips, increased Ranger and educator visits—including sending Rangers to visit public school classrooms—and 
support for partnerships with nonprofits and other agencies. One idea surfaced through this research is for the city 
to start with fourth graders, mirroring the federal Every Kid Outdoors initiative, and work with New York City Public 
Schools to develop a nature curriculum with an outdoors component. This initiative could build on the success of 
a current Parks-Schools partnership, Swim for Life, which focuses on teaching second graders how to swim. Over 
time, this would make outdoor learning a regular part of every student’s experience, helping to build familiarity, 
confidence, and long-term engagement.
7
Community-based programming can also play an important 
role in building that sense of belonging. At the NYC Bird  
Alliance, for example, outings are offered across all five  
boroughs, including in Spanish and Mandarin, helping to 
reach New Yorkers who may not otherwise see themselves 
reflected in these spaces. “Something that we have really 
focused on is making sure that our programming is accessible,” 
says Tasha Naula, the organization’s public programs  
manager. “Part of that is inviting those who are traditionally 
not invited into natural spaces to participate.”
3. Transit and connectivity 
challenges make many natural 
areas difficult to reach.
Even when New Yorkers are interested in visiting these 
spaces, they often face difficult journeys.
In public workshops, Emily Walker, former senior manager 
of external affairs at NAC, says transportation comes up 
again and again. “We hear a lot of feedback that some of 
the natural areas that exist are serviced by bus lines that 
often get rerouted on weekends,” she says. “So there’s this 
missing piece, where one hand is not talking to the other. 
We’re not a transit organization and parks are not often 
seen as a transit issue, but transit is how New Yorkers get to 
parks and natural areas.”
For many of the city’s largest and most ecologically  
rich landscapes, the challenge is even more pronounced. 
“Throughout Staten Island, some of our most essential 
roads are mostly just two-lane roads that go to and from, or 
often straight through, these huge, beautiful areas,” says 
Andy Blancero, a borough native who previously worked as  
director of development for the Freshkills Park Alliance. The 
nature center in Staten Island’s Greenbelt—a 2,800-acre 
network with nearly 40 miles of trails—is nearly impossible 
to access without a car. “If you try to take a bus there, you 
can get to an intersection that’s so far off the side—about a 
third of a mile walk—with no sidewalk along the road that 
goes there,” Blancero says. The same applies to wild areas on 
the borough’s South Shore. “The best way to get to something 
like Blue Heron Park Nature Center, via train or bus, also  
requires an awkward and scary road with no space but for 
speeding drivers.”
Barriers exist even in more densely populated parts of 
the city. At Ridgewood Reservoir, a 50-acre wetland on the 
Brooklyn–Queens border, the nearest Citi Bike station is a 
mile away and bus access is limited. “The reservoir, which is 
in the center of a community of real need, was created in a 
Robert Moses kind of vision,” says Peter Frishauf, president 
of the board of NYC H2O, a nonprofit that leads free tours  
of the reservoir. “You’d drive up near the Jackie Robinson 
Parkway and park your car. Even if you wanted to walk, there 
were no sidewalks.”
Local groups have made progress in improving access. 
NYC H2O has partnered with Ridgewood Rides and success-
fully advocated for curb extensions, bike lanes and a potential 
new Citi Bike station, helping to boost visitation. “We’ve  
really pushed it to become a more inclusive area, and usage 
has skyrocketed,” Frishauf says. “But still, gaps remain.”
Policy Idea: Increasing perceptions of safety and  
belonging via Urban Park Rangers
SAFETY CONCERNS REMAIN A MAJOR BARRIER TO VISITING NATURAL AREAS, PARTICULARLY FOR WOMEN 
and people of color. Many of these spaces are lightly trafficked and lack a consistent public presence, reinforcing 
perceptions that they are unsafe or unwelcoming. Expanding access will require more than enforcement alone: It 
will take a regular, visible presence from staff who can welcome visitors, lead programming, answer questions, and 
help New Yorkers feel comfortable exploring these spaces.
Our research suggests that one high-potential option for policymakers is to strengthen the capacity and role 
of Urban Park Rangers in natural areas, creating a more consistent and visible human presence in the park sys -
tem’s less-trafficked areas. This strategy could enable Rangers to spend more time building public confidence, 
guiding visitors, leading programs, and supporting safe use of wild places. NYC Parks could also explore creating 
a dedicated natural areas safety team, with consistent assignments in forests, wetlands, trails, and waterfront 
spaces. Together, a stronger Ranger presence and a specialized safety team could increase visibility, and help 
break the cycle of underuse that keeps many natural areas feeling isolated.
8
HARNESSING NYC’S NATURAL AREAS
These accessibility challenges can create a self-rein -
forcing cycle. When transit options are limited, fewer New 
Yorkers visit, reducing overall awareness and weakening the 
case for further investment. At Jamaica Bay, one of the city’s 
most expansive natural areas, the length and complexity of 
the trip deters many would-be visitors. “Access and aware -
ness must be built together, where transportation to natural 
areas is treated not as a response to existing demand, but 
something to build through planning and investment,” says 
Terri Carta, executive director of the Jamaica Bay-Rockaway 
Parks Conservancy. “When access to places like Jamaica 
Bay is visible, intuitive, and well-connected, you expand who 
uses these spaces and therefore who advocates for their 
long-term care.”
In a city where most residents rely on public transporta-
tion, those connections are essential. Groups like Shore -
walkers structure their outings entirely around transit ac -
cess. “We don’t do any carpooling,” says Pam Cress, the 
organization’s president. “It’s all subways, buses and trains. 
That’s been our mission since 1982.” But for many destina-
tions, those connections remain incomplete.
These challenges also affect school access, where 
transportation is often contingent on scheduling and paying 
for a school bus. “If you want to get the students out to Alley 
Pond in Queens or Wave Hill in the Bronx—or Prospect Park 
or Staten Island Greenbelt—you have to get the bus situation 
better than it is,” says Mike Zamm, an emeritus member of 
the Environmental Education Advisory Council.
Recent investments in greenways have begun to improve 
access, linking neighborhoods to waterfronts and natural 
areas. Advocates say even small improvements—like better 
signage and wayfinding—can make a difference. “As our  
greenways start to get longer and more interconnected, 
these simple signs help establish a sense of place that’s 
missing right now,” says Joby Jacob, a founder of the Eastern 
Queens Greenway. “Those who are interested should at 
least be made aware of what exists in their neighborhoods.”
4. Chronic underinvestment leaves 
many natural areas understaffed 
and undermaintained.
Funding for natural areas has been inconsistent  
and insufficient.
The care of New York City’s natural areas has long been 
underfunded, and in periods of fiscal stress, these resources 
are often among the first to be cut.
An analysis of NYC Parks data finds that although  
forests, wetlands, salt marshes, and streams make up 
roughly one-third of all parkland, they receive only a small 
share of funding. Over the past five years, no additional city 
expense dollars have been allocated to wetland restoration, 
beyond the team’s seven permanent staff. Outside of a 
one-time $430,000 investment in FY 2022, natural areas 
construction and green infrastructure have received no city 
expense funding, although the agency has been able to  
secure funding through state and federal grants. Most city 
spending has gone toward forest restoration and steward -
ship, totaling just $590,000 in FY 2025—down sharply 
from $5.5 million in FY 2022.
On the capital side, investment has been similarly  
inconsistent. The Natural Resources Group (NRG), the  
division within NYC Parks responsible for stewarding natural 
areas, has received strikingly little capital funding in some 
recent fiscal years. Funding has fluctuated widely. For instance, 
the agency received $7.1 million in wetland restoration 
funds in FY 2022 following Hurricane Ida, then none the  
following two years. Data shows a similar gap in landscape 
construction funds, with no dollars allocated in FY 2023 or FY 
2024. Funding gaps and unpredictability have resulted in a 
backlog of unfunded projects, including public access and 
habitat restoration at Vernam Barbadoes Peninsula in the 
Rockaways, public access and upland restoration at Spring 
Creek Park on the Brooklyn-Queens border, and  
restoration work at Snug Harbor’s North Forest.
Policy Idea: Piloting citywide “Nature Days”
TO ADDRESS THE BARRIERS THAT PREVENT MANY NEW YORKERS FROM ACCESSING THE CITY’S NATURAL 
areas, the city could pilot a bold, highly visible initiative such as a series of monthly, citywide “Nature Days” during 
the warmer months. On select weekends, NYC Parks—working with the Department of Transportation and the 
MTA—could coordinate enhanced access through shuttle buses, expanded transit service, guided hikes, and  
family-friendly events. A one-year pilot would allow the city to test demand, identify high-interest sites, and build 
the case for permanent improvements to access and programming.
9
HARNESSING NYC’S NATURAL AREAS
New York City cares for less than half of the natural area it maintained two years ago 
Newly baselined funding can help the city reverse this trend going forward
 
               
 
 
 
Source: The City of New York, Mayor's Management Report, 2025, https://www.nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/pdf/
mmr2025/2025_mmr.pdf. Created with Datawrapper
New York City’s natural areas are a major component of total parkland but, due to 
multiple factors, receive a small share of annual spending
 
               
Source: Natural Areas Conservancy, "Funding Forested Natural Areas: Recent Trends in New York City," 2023,  
https://naturalareasnyc.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/01/NAC-Funding-Forested-Natural-Areas.pdf 
Created with Datawrapper

10
HARNESSING NYC’S NATURAL AREAS
Limited staffing leaves most natural areas  
without regular care.
Despite overseeing more than 12,000 acres of natural 
areas, the NRG has a staff of just 102 employees—about 
one for every 120 acres—and accounts for only 1 percent of 
NYC Parks’ total headcount. As a result, most natural areas  
receive little to no regular maintenance. In FY 2025, just  
4.7 percent of NRG-managed land—569 acres in total, an 
area smaller than Central Park—received any upkeep, a 54 
percent decline over the past two years.
For New Yorkers, these gaps translate into spaces that 
are often difficult to access, poorly maintained, or effectively 
off-limits. Trails and entry points fall into disrepair, and the 
lack of a consistent staff presence can reinforce safety  
concerns. In Forest Park, for example, a single staff member 
is responsible for maintaining nine miles of trails across a 
165-acre forest—the largest of its kind in Queens.
For those who rely on these spaces, the consequences 
are immediate. Jessica Halsrud, founder of the Kew Kids 
Forest School, brings young children into Forest Park daily, 
but often must organize community cleanups herself. “The 
problems are around trash and cleanliness,” she says,  
noting issues ranging from broken glass to human waste, as 
well as trails that become impassable when trees fall or 
rocks slide. “It gives the impression that this is not a good 
place to be. People turn away from this incredible resource.”
Programming and education efforts are constrained 
by limited resources.
Programming is one of the most effective ways to connect 
New Yorkers to natural areas, but it remains limited in scale. 
Studies and interviews conducted for this report consistently 
find that when people are introduced to these spaces 
through guided activities, they are far more likely to return 
and bring others with them. “The programming part is really 
important,” says Paul Steely White, executive director of 
Parks & Trails New York. “Because if you can have an attrac-
tive event that turns people onto that space, then they know 
where it is and how to get there. You’re beginning to estab-
lish that habit.”
Yet most programming is delivered by community 
groups with limited capacity. Across the city, these activi -
ties—ranging from hikes and birding outings to waterfront 
kayaking and environmental education—are often organized 
by volunteers, schools, and nonprofit organizations, and are 
concentrated in a relatively small number of locations.  
“Most of the programming is really led by the community,” 
says Chauncy Young, co-chair of the NYC Greenway  
Coalition. “We’re not Central Park—we don’t have an  
alliance with millions of dollars. So there’s always going to 
be that inequity in terms of what resources are available.”
City-led capacity is also constrained. The Urban Park 
Rangers—the city’s primary environmental educators—  
remain stretched thin, with roughly one Ranger for every 
100,000 New Yorkers. Staffing has remained relatively flat, 
with about 40 permanent Rangers since 2007. Today, there 
are 94 Rangers citywide. In FY 2026, Rangers led more 
than 4,700 programs citywide, reaching over 115,000 New 
Yorkers, a clear indicator that these programs are welcomed 
by residents when they are available. That reach could grow 
significantly with expanded staff capacity and less year-to-
year uncertainty. 
“Many natural areas don’t have environmental education 
programs going on,” says Janice Melnick, former NYC Parks 
administrator in Northeast Queens. “[The Rangers] have a 
unique set of skills . . . but we have so few of them.” 
Even as demand grows, the system lacks staffing and 
resources to scale up programming and meet it. On the wa-
Policy Idea: Planning for the long-term care needs 
of NYC’s natural areas
FOR YEARS, THE CAPITAL AND EXPENSE DOLLARS COMMITTED TO THE CITY’S NATURAL AREAS HAVE NOT 
kept up with maintenance needs or rising demand, even as these spaces face mounting pressures from climate 
change and increased usage. In addition to reckoning with the true cost of effective natural areas care and  
maintenance, New York City will need more creative approaches to closing the gap between current capacity and 
the scale of need across more than 12,000 acres of natural areas. Public-private partnerships, philanthropic  
support, and state tourism and environmental funding streams could all play a larger role in that effort. A five-year 
roadmap could help align existing programs and partners, identify promising models, and establish clear goals for 
acreage maintained, visitor participation, programming, and long-term stewardship. Such an effort could bring 
public, nonprofit, private, and philanthropic stakeholders together to support a new era of access to nature.
11
HARNESSING NYC’S NATURAL AREAS
terfront, for example, volunteer-run boathouses offer free 
kayaking and canoeing trips across the city, but access is 
constrained by a limited number of launch sites and staff. 
“Our goal is just to get as many people out on the water as 
possible,” says Mike Petite, co-founder of the Manhattan 
Community Boathouse. “But the number one limiting factor 
is that there are only so many places people can get on.” 
Where access is available, the response is clear. “When our 
kayaking is free, our demographics reflect the city’s demo -
graphics,” says Graeme Birchall, former president of the 
Downtown Boathouse. “In other words: People want to get 
on the water.”
Nonprofit partners are filling critical gaps,  
but at limited scale.
Across the city, groups like the NAC, the Central Park 
Conservancy, and the Van Cortlandt Park Alliance have 
stepped in to maintain trails, restore ecosystems, and  
support visitor engagement. The NAC’s Pathkeepers  
program includes about 150 volunteers who “adopt” trails 
throughout the city, while the Van Cortlandt Park Alliance 
funds additional staff to manage more than 40 miles of 
trails across three distinct forest systems.
But these efforts are uneven and limited in scale. 
“There’s very little money that goes into trails every year,” 
says Jaeger, formerly of the NAC. “NYC Parks has two  
full-time employees and two seasonal employees—for  
almost 300 miles of trails.” In many areas, volunteer labor 
is expected to fill the gap, even when the work is physically 
demanding and requires specialized skills. In some cases, 
community organizations feel that they are obligated to take 
on maintenance responsibilities that exceed their capacity 
in order to deliver the access that their communities need. 
At Idlewild Park in Southeast Queens, the Eastern Queens 
Alliance advocated for new trails through a 160-acre Forever 
Wild area, a designation given to park areas with significant 
natural habitats. As part of the approval process, the  
organization has been asked to commit to maintaining the 
trails that extend beyond NYC Parks’ typical maintenance 
capacity. “We have pushed for it,” says Barbara Brown, the 
group’s chair, “but now we’re being asked to guarantee that 
we’re going to maintain the trails.”
The result is a system that depends heavily on nonprofit 
partners to fill critical gaps, but without the consistent public 
investment needed to support and sustain their work at scale.
5. Climate change is increasing 
pressure on natural areas.
New York City’s natural areas are not only critical to 
the city’s climate resilience, they are increasingly at 
risk from the very impacts they help mitigate.
Forests, wetlands, and other natural systems serve as 
carbon sinks, absorb stormwater, and help cool neighbor -
hoods during extreme heat. But these landscapes are  
facing growing stress from more intense storms, shifting 
precipitation patterns, and rising temperatures. Over a  
ten-year period, from 2014 to 2024, the NAC found that  
invasive vines—which can kill trees and other plantings—
rose by 9 percent, appearing in 91 percent of its monitored 
plots.12 Meanwhile, research from Rebuild by Design  
projects that by 2100, more than two-thirds of the city’s 
parks will fall within flood zones.13
Policy Idea: Modernizing the city’s 300-plus miles of trails
TRAILS ARE ESSENTIAL TO MAKING NATURAL AREAS ACCESSIBLE, PROVIDING SAFE PATHWAYS THROUGH 
ecologically sensitive environments and helping visitors navigate unfamiliar terrain. The city could strengthen the 
current network by conducting a reassessment of its existing trail system to identify routes that are difficult to find, 
informal, or ecologically harmful. This effort could identify which trails need sustained maintenance, improved 
signage, formalization, rerouting, or closure, while also exploring carefully targeted opportunities to improve access 
where trails can be added without harming natural areas. At the same time, NYC Parks could partner with private- 
sector firms and nonprofit experts to modernize trail maps, digital navigation tools, and wayfinding, making it easier 
for residents to discover and explore the city’s natural spaces safely and responsibly.
12
These pressures are increasing the cost of maintaining 
already under-resourced systems. According to the NAC, 
maintaining a healthy forested area now costs about 
$1,037 per acre annually—roughly $20.7 million per year 
across the city’s natural areas. 14 Recent one-time grant 
funding has helped address some needs, including state 
grants for invasive species management, but ongoing city 
expense funding for forest care has not exceeded $5.5  
million in any recent fiscal year.
Responding to climate risks also requires major capital 
investment. Retrofitting natural areas to better absorb storm-
water can cost tens of millions of dollars. The Bluebelt system 
on Staten Island, which uses natural landscapes to manage 
flooding, cost $110 million to build, while the East Side Coastal 
Resiliency Project is expected to cost nearly $1.5 billion to 
protect vulnerable parkland along the East River.
Forest care and climate resiliency projects protect 
against events like the 2024 brush fire in the Ravine in  
Prospect Park—Brooklyn’s largest upland forest—which  
destroyed two acres of tree canopy after weeks of dry condi-
tions exacerbated by deferred maintenance. The Ravine will 
take years, if not decades, to recover.
Even in parks with strong nonprofit partners, resources 
are stretched thin. Following the Ravine fire, the Prospect 
Park Alliance secured funding to expand its ecological staff, 
meeting only some of the need. “We’re stewarding more 
acres than our current resources can support, under greater 
pressure from increased climate risks,” says Leila Mougoui 
Bakhtiari, the Alliance’s director of landscape management. 
“At the same time, our team brings decades of experience 
in natural areas restoration and continues to deliver 
high-quality work across the park.” 
Policy Idea: Unlocking benefits for youth and natural areas in one
YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT IN NEW YORK CITY REMAINS MORE THAN DOUBLE THE CITYWIDE AVERAGE AND has 
risen in recent years, even as many young New Yorkers face elevated rates of loneliness, anxiety, and other mental 
health challenges. At the same time, the city’s forests, wetlands, trails, and shorelines need far more hands-on 
care than current staffing levels can provide. NYC Parks already operates promising youth stewardship programs, 
including the Urban Park Rangers’ Ranger Conservation Corps, a free eight-week environmental conservation  
internship that serves roughly 200 high school students annually, as well as Natural Resources Group youth and 
young adult internships supported in part through the city’s Summer Youth Employment Program. But these  
efforts remain far smaller than the scale of the opportunity.
A larger “NYC Youth Conservation Corps” could build on these foundations by connecting more youth employ-
ment opportunities to natural areas stewardship, with paid placements focused on trail building and maintenance, 
tree care, horticulture, habitat restoration, shoreline stewardship, and visitor engagement. Participants could be 
placed with NYC Parks, the NAC, other conservancies, and community-based partners across the five boroughs. 
Corps members could also help introduce more young New Yorkers to the city’s natural areas through peer-to-peer 
outreach and social media campaigns—something like “Trail Teens of TikTok”—spotlighting nearby hikes, water -
fronts, forests, and volunteer opportunities in ways that feel authentic to their generation. The strongest programs 
would not end with a summer paycheck: They would connect participants to year-round jobs, apprenticeships, 
college programs, and industry-recognized credentials in forestry, horticulture, ecological restoration, landscape 
management, and natural resource careers. By scaling proven models and linking immediate work experience to 
real advancement opportunities, New York City could build the next generation of stewards for its natural areas 
while creating meaningful pathways to economic mobility.
13
HARNESSING NYC’S NATURAL AREAS
IN SO MANY PARTS OF THE CITY, THE CONCRETE JUNGLE  
can feel far away. The rugged parks of Upper Manhattan  
introduce visitors to the island’s glacial past of hills and  
valleys. The wetlands of Pelham Bay Park, near the Bronx’s 
Orchard Beach, offer space to walk along the Long Island 
Sound. And Freshkills Park—a sprawling landscape emerg -
ing from the remains of the city’s largest landfill—will soon 
become the largest such space in the city. Beyond city-
owned land, places like the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge and 
Shirley Chisholm State Park extend these opportunities 
even further.
For so many New Yorkers, the more than 12,000 acres 
of city-managed natural areas are invaluable.15 They offer a 
quiet escape for the roughly 20 percent of residents who 
frequently endure excessive noise, which is linked to higher 
stress, at home.16 They are a place to breathe amid poor air 
quality, which worsens asthma and cardiovascular disease, 
conditions especially pronounced in low-income communi -
ties. And when indoor and private spaces may feel cost-pro-
hibitive or less welcoming, the outdoors provide an accessi-
ble, affordable alternative.
Yet only a fraction of New Yorkers are experiencing 
these unique natural resources today and the powerful  
benefits that come with spending time in them.
In Brooklyn’s Marine Park, a 530-acre expanse of salt 
marsh, Tasha LaDonna hosts workshops in “forest bathing,” 
the Japanese-inspired practice of immersing oneself in  
nature for a prolonged period. LaDonna, a certified instructor, 
hadn’t seen anything like this activitiy offered where she 
lives—and says people embraced it once they were intro -
duced to an admittedly unfamiliar concept. The therapy has 
documented benefits: According to research from Johns 
Hopkins University, it can reduce blood pressure and  
improve cognition. “We need something here, because not 
everybody can leave the city to enjoy the forest and nature,” 
she says. “And we shouldn’t have to—not if we have the  
resources here.”
In some parts of the city, natural areas have undergone 
something of a renaissance since the pandemic. In Prospect 
Park, staff have expanded trails to accommodate increased 
usage. The Central Park Conservancy launched a Ranger 
Corps in response to rising visitation. And across the city, 
organizations that connect New Yorkers to nature report 
sustained, often unprecedented demand for programming 
and guided experiences. Naula of the NYC Bird Alliance, 
which hosts birding outings in multiple parks and languages 
citywide, says attendance spiked during the pandemic and 
has remained high. “We’ve seen and heard the personal  
experiences,” recalls Naula, a Queens native. “I hear, ‘This 
is something I did in COVID, and it provided me with such  
a sense of relief and calmness. I feel better physically  
and mentally.’”
At the same time, the pandemic revealed stark divides 
in access to nature. Many New Yorkers whose work allowed 
it decamped to the Hudson Valley, Long Island, or beyond, 
where access to open space was easier to come by. Others 
bought cars to do the same. For many working-class New 
Yorkers, however, these options did not exist, and crowded 
neighborhoods with the least access to green space, including 
Jackson Heights and Corona, experienced disproportionately 
higher mortality rates than the citywide average.17
It’s not just physical health at stake. Students who  
participate in outdoor programs report improvements in  
behavior, academic performance, and social development, 
while programs like NYC Outward Bound Schools have been 
linked to higher graduation rates.18 
In a survey of high school participants conducted for 
the Center for an Urban Future, students described what 
these experiences meant to them. “Time in nature makes 
us more productive,” one senior says. A ninth grader adds, 
“It’s healthy to be outside and not always be on your phone.” 
Another student, reflecting on time spent rock climbing and 
hiking, describes learning how to work with others and  
becoming more self-reliant. “In the city, we have everything 
we need,” they say. “But in the woods, you have to figure  
out how to make stuff work. It would be nice to bring more 
of that into the city.”
Why Time in Nature Matters  
for New Yorkers
14
Policy Idea: Library-based “Nature & Culture Hubs”
OUR RESEARCH SUGGESTS THAT INFORMATION GAPS SERIOUSLY LIMIT PARTICIPATION IN NATURE-BASED 
activities, restricting potential community benefits. One promising option to address those gaps is to utilize public 
libraries, which are already among the most trusted institutions in the city. Despite boasting locations in every 
neighborhood and strong relationships with residents, they remain an underutilized asset when it comes to con -
necting New Yorkers to nearby nature, outdoor recreation, and cultural life. With the right resources and partner -
ships, libraries could serve as neighborhood gateways to parks, trails, waterfronts, gardens, cultural organizations, 
performances, public art, historic sites, and other low-cost opportunities close to where New Yorkers live.
A network of “Nature & Culture Hubs” at libraries, particularly in underserved communities, could start with a 
simple but important function: providing clear, accessible information about local nature-based activities, nearby 
access points, transit routes, volunteer opportunities, free and low-cost cultural events, and neighborhood arts 
and heritage programming. Over time, these hubs could also offer lendable equipment, small grants for program-
ming, and partnerships with local organizations to expand access. They could support community co-design of 
programming, ensuring that activities reflect local cultures and needs while helping residents feel a stronger sense 
of ownership over nearby natural and cultural assets. 
Jamaica Bay-Rockaway Parks Conservancy
15
HARNESSING NYC’S NATURAL AREAS
IN THE YEARS SINCE THE PANDEMIC RENEWED INTEREST 
in New York City’s open spaces, policymakers and NYC Parks 
have taken important steps to improve the stewardship and 
activation of natural areas. From expanded programming 
and restoration efforts to new planning initiatives and  
investments in environmental education, these efforts  
promote increased engagement with the outdoors and  
reflect a growing recognition of natural areas as essential 
infrastructure for public health, climate resilience, and quality 
of life. However, significant capacity challenges persist, with 
consequences for the health of the city’s natural areas and 
efforts to expand access to them.
With additional staffing, NYC Parks 
is engaging more New Yorkers 
outdoors than before. 
For years, one-shot funding has helped NYC Parks expand 
the programs that connect New Yorkers to natural areas. 
Since before the pandemic, temporary and seasonal Urban 
Park Rangers have bolstered the agency’s capacity, with 
funding provided by the City Council from FY 2019 through 
FY 2025 and by the mayor in FY 2026. These positions have 
enabled NYC Parks to reach more residents through nature 
walks, wildlife programming, youth activities, and steward -
ship events. But because the funding is not baselined, 
these jobs remain vulnerable to annual budget negotiations 
and political and economic headwinds, making it harder for 
the agency to plan, hire, and retain the staff needed to grow 
these programs over time.
Our analysis of Urban Park Ranger programming shows 
that youth participation rose sharply in recent years.  
Between 2021 and 2024, the number of young attendees 
increased by nearly 160 percent, from 10,153 to 26,408 
participants, and the number of programs offered nearly  
tripled, to 1,129. 19 In total, more than 90,000 young New 
Yorkers took part in Ranger-led programming over that period.
Much of this growth has been driven by popular offer -
ings like Kids & Family programs, which include science 
fairs, school break activities, and family-friendly outings. 
Wildlife viewing programs—such as birdwatching and animal 
observation—have also drawn tens of thousands of partici -
pants, while guided hikes and nature exploration programs 
continue to introduce New Yorkers to the city’s forests,  
wetlands, and trails.
The Stewardship program has seen similar gains. In FY 
2023, nearly 7,000 New Yorkers participated in volunteer 
activities across 516 events. The following year, participation 
increased by nearly 1,000 people, even as the number of 
events declined slightly, suggesting strong demand for 
hands-on opportunities to care for natural areas.
In the FY 2027 budget, the Mamdani administration 
made notable progress on investing in natural areas care. 
That includes baselining $9.8 million for Parks Enforcement 
Patrol officers, $6.2 million for park workers, and $3 million 
for forestry management, which ensures that funding will 
last beyond the next budget cycle. Additionally, $5.8 million 
was set aside for Urban Park Rangers—a jump of over  
$1 million from the year before.
Restoration and long-term planning 
efforts are gaining momentum.
Alongside expanded programming, NYC Parks and its part -
ners—especially the NAC and the Mayor’s Office of Climate 
and Environmental Justice (MOCEJ)—have made meaningful 
progress in restoring and planning for the long-term stew -
ardship of the city’s natural areas.
Restoration work has accelerated in recent years,  
helping to address decades of deferred maintenance and 
environmental degradation. Since 1991, NYC Parks has  
restored more than 850 acres of natural areas, planting over 
950,000 native trees and shrubs since 2007. More recently, 
between 2020 and 2025, the agency—often in partnership 
with the NAC and with support from state funding—has com-
pleted several significant projects across the five boroughs.
On Staten Island, a portion of the 214-acre Willowbrook 
Park—one of the most heavily used areas within the Greenbelt—
was cleared of invasive species, replanted with native vege-
tation, and outfitted with new protections against deer  
overpopulation, which had threatened forest regeneration. 
In Queens, wetlands restoration projects at Sunset Cove 
Park, Seagirt Ave Wetlands, and Hook Creek Park have 
helped rebuild coastal ecosystems and improve resilience 
along vulnerable shorelines. At Alley Creek, a “living  
shoreline” project has restored natural habitats along Little 
NYC Is Making Progress on Natural Areas, 
But Significant Gaps Remain
16
Neck Bay while strengthening the area’s ability to withstand 
erosion and storm surge.
But these efforts are reaching only a fraction of the city’s 
natural areas. Each year, staff and volunteers care for an an-
nual maximum of about 1,000 acres—roughly one-twelfth of 
the total natural area acreage—leaving large portions of the 
system without regular restoration or maintenance.
At the same time, city leaders are advancing a new 
generation of long-term planning efforts aimed at strength -
ening the future of these landscapes. MOCEJ led the devel-
opment of the city’s first Urban Forest Plan, released in 
April 2026, which outlines strategies to expand tree canopy 
coverage to 30 percent—an effort that will rely heavily on 
the health of forested natural areas. 20 The forthcoming  
Environmental Justice NYC Plan—the city’s first-ever such 
blueprint—will also prioritize expanding access to green 
space in underserved communities.
NYC Parks and the NAC have collaboratively developed 
updated frameworks for managing forests, wetlands, and 
shorelines, including long-term strategies for restoration 
and resilience. These efforts come at a critical moment, as 
the city looks to natural systems to play a larger role in miti-
gating climate impacts and protecting vulnerable neighbor-
hoods.  Recent efforts to expand greenways are also helping 
to better connect New Yorkers to natural areas. The city’s 
first five-borough greenway master plan in decades, re -
leased in 2025, lays out a vision for safer, more continuous 
connections between neighborhoods and open spaces, in -
cluding routes linking the South Bronx, Eastern Queens, and 
Staten Island’s North Shore.21
Together, these efforts reflect a growing recognition of 
the importance of natural areas. But their full impact will 
depend on sustained investment and consistent fol -
low-through. Without that, much of the city’s natural land -
scape will remain underserved, even as interest in these 
spaces continues to grow.
Environmental education and green 
workforce initiatives are expanding, 
but remain limited in scale.
Efforts to expand environmental education and connect New 
Yorkers to careers in natural areas stewardship have grown in 
recent years, reflecting increasing interest in sustainability and 
climate resilience among both students and policymakers.
In New York City’s public schools, environmental edu -
cation is becoming more widespread. Nearly 90 percent of 
schools now have Sustainability Coordinators—about 1,700 
coordinators in total—who help integrate climate and envi -
ronmental topics into the curriculum and connect students 
to hands-on learning opportunities. 22 The Department of 
Education also offers grants of up to $5,000 for school-
based sustainability projects, along with a centralized  
Sustainability Hub to help teachers identify partner organi -
zations and plan field experiences. 23
But access to these opportunities remains uneven.  
Interviews with educators and program providers point to 
persistent barriers, including limited time during the school 
day, logistical challenges for field trips, and costs associated 
with visiting sites operated by other agencies. In many cases, 
students can only participate if a natural area is located 
nearby or if schools have the resources to organize longer 
outings.
At the same time, natural areas are increasingly being 
recognized for providing pathways to careers in the growing 
green economy. City agencies and nonprofit organizations 
have launched a range of workforce development initiatives 
in areas like urban forestry, ecological restoration, and 
coastal resilience. Recent investments include a $10 mil -
lion federal grant secured by NYC Parks for workforce train-
ing in natural areas care and stewardship, as well as a 
$629,000 program supporting paid training in coastal res -
toration along Jamaica Bay.
Across the city, nonprofit-led programs are helping to 
train the next generation of workers in these fields. The For-
ests for All NYC coalition, which includes more than 50 orga-
nizations, identified nearly 40 training programs citywide 
focused on tree care and natural areas stewardship, run by 
groups such as the City Parks Foundation and the NAC. 24 
Separately, our survey found that natural areas workforce 
programs are training up to 1,000 New Yorkers each year, 
often drawing participants from the communities most af -
fected by environmental challenges.25 
Some initiatives are also experimenting with new path-
ways into the field. At Green-Wood Cemetery, for example, 
the Urban Wood Reuse Pilot—developed in partnership with 
the Brooklyn-based sustainable wood supplier Tri-Lox—uses 
salvaged park wood as a training material for career pro -
grams in woodworking and reuse, turning what would other-
wise be waste into a workforce asset. Meanwhile, the City 
Parks Foundation’s Green Girls program introduces young 
women of color to careers in urban forestry and environmen-
tal stewardship through hands-on training and mentorship.
But the number of permanent jobs tied to the care, pro-
gramming, and restoration of natural areas remains relatively 
small. Our analysis finds that these activities currently employ 
only about 350 workers across NYC Parks and partner orga-
nizations.26 This gap reflects not a lack of interest or training 
capacity, but a lack of sustained investment in the work itself. 
Even as the city expands programming, restoration, and cli-
mate resilience efforts, funding for ongoing maintenance, 
stewardship, and operations has not kept pace. 
At the same time, stewardship organizations say that 
more is needed to help turn part-time, seasonal, and tempo-
rary opportunities into meaningful career pathways. Many 
training programs provide introductory exposure, but transi-
17
HARNESSING NYC’S NATURAL AREAS
tioning into long-term employment often requires additional 
credentials, certifications, or years of hands-on experience. 
For example, becoming a licensed arborist can take several 
years of supervised fieldwork, while other roles in environ -
mental science or restoration may require college degrees 
or specialized training. Without stronger alignment between 
training programs, credentialing systems, and employers, 
many participants face an uncertain path from initial expo -
sure to stable, well-paying careers.
Policy Idea: “NYC Nature-Based Jobs Coalition”
WHILE NEW YORK CITY IS TRAINING HUNDREDS OF RESIDENTS EACH YEAR FOR JOBS IN NATURAL AREAS,   
it has far fewer stable positions to absorb them. This mismatch reflects a lack of stable career-track positions to 
move into, not a lack of interest or training. Without more stable roles in maintenance, stewardship, restoration, 
and programming, the city will continue to fall short of both the workforce needed to care for these spaces and the 
jobs needed to make training a meaningful pathway to economic mobility.
One promising approach would be to expand stable, long-term roles connected to natural areas stewardship 
while reducing reliance on fragmented short-term contracts where possible. At the same time, a “New York City 
Nature-Based Jobs Coalition” could build on the work of Forest for All NYC and Just Nature NYC to better coordi -
nate training, apprenticeships, credentials, and hiring across the growing field of natural areas stewardship. The 
coalition could align training programs with apprenticeships, industry-recognized credentials, degree pathways, 
and real hiring needs—especially for roles like arborist, horticultural technician, trail specialist, and natural  
resource manager, where hands-on experience is essential. By organizing clearer routes into these roles and 
better matching training to hiring demand, New York City could build a workforce that supports both environmental 
goals and economic mobility.
Young adults kayaking in Jamaica Bay  
(Jamaica Bay-Rockaway Parks Conservancy).
18
CITIES AND ORGANIZATIONS ACROSS THE COUNTRY ARE 
experimenting with new approaches to expand access to 
nature, increase engagement, and strengthen stewardship 
of natural areas. While New York City has made progress in 
recent years, these examples highlight opportunities to go 
further by leveraging partnerships, engaging communities 
more directly, and investing in creative, scalable solutions.
REI–Chicago Park District  
partnership at Ping Tom Memorial 
Park expands programming and 
stewardship (Chicago, IL).
At Ping Tom Memorial Park along the Chicago River, the Chicago 
Park District partnered with REI Co-op to operate kayak rentals 
and programming at a public boathouse. In addition to rentals, 
REI provides guided tours, leads volunteer cleanups, and 
serves on the park’s advisory council, helping to activate the 
space while supporting long-term stewardship.
Advocates see potential for similar partnerships in New 
York City. Companies like Google could help map and promote 
trail networks, while outdoor brands like Patagonia could 
support programming or develop tools to make natural areas 
more accessible. “We’re a non-profit organization with a focus 
on providing high-quality public programming, so we don’t  
always have the niche technical expertise for tool making, 
map building, or biodiversity metrics,” says Scheid of Alley 
Pond Environmental Center. “It’s worth exploring a partner-
ship, because we wish we had access to more formalized 
information to share with the public.”
Community co-design at  
Waterfront Park drives diverse 
participation and higher  
attendance (Seattle, WA).
In Seattle’s Waterfront Park, organizers have prioritized  
inclusive, community-led programming from the outset.  
Advisory groups focused on accessibility, Indigenous com -
munities, and local residents help shape events and activities, 
with paid facilitation ensuring sustained engagement.
“The waterfront holds a lot of different stories that  
are quite traumatic for many communities,” says Yoon 
Kang-O’Higgins, senior director of community impact and 
programs at Friends of Waterfront Park. “So, we have a model 
of co-curating and co-designing our decision-making as 
community partners.” The result has been strong attendance 
across a diverse range of communities, demonstrating the 
impact of intentional outreach and shared governance. 
Best Practices: Maximizing Benefits  
of NYC’s Natural Areas
Policy Idea: “Explore Forever Wild NYC”
IN INTERVIEWS FOR THIS REPORT, LACK OF AWARENESS EMERGED AS ONE OF THE MOST CONSISTENT  
barriers, even among longtime residents who had never visited nearby natural areas. Without a coordinated effort 
to raise visibility, these spaces will remain underused.
The city could launch a five-borough awareness campaign—“Explore Forever Wild NYC”—to promote natural 
areas across subways, buses, LinkNYC kiosks, schools, and digital platforms. Working with Empire State Develop-
ment, NYC Parks could tap into existing state tourism dollars and align messaging with the “I Love NY” campaign. 
This effort should be paired with improved wayfinding, updated trail maps, and digital tools to help residents navi-
gate the city’s 300 miles of trails.27
19
HARNESSING NYC’S NATURAL AREAS
“I Love NY” campaign demonstrates 
the power of statewide marketing 
and wayfinding (New York State).
New York State’s “I Love NY” campaign has successfully  
promoted destinations like Watkins Glen, Fire Island, and the 
Erie Canal through coordinated advertising across digital, 
transit, and media platforms. By contrast, New York City’s 
natural areas lack a comparable, citywide marketing effort.
Some experts suggest that initiatives like “Forever Wild” 
could serve as a unifying brand to promote local natural  
areas, paired with improved on-site wayfinding. “We have 
300 miles of trails. How do we get New Yorkers aware of 
those trails and where they exist?” says Emily Walker,  
formerly of the NAC. “The city should be thinking comprehen-
sively about the connection points that can be made.” 
Miyawaki Method “pocket forest” 
on Roosevelt Island shows how 
small sites can deliver big impact 
(New York City).
Even in dense urban settings, small-scale investments can 
significantly expand access to nature. In 2024, a 
2,700-square-foot Miyawaki Method “pocket forest”—New 
York City’s first, funded by global nonprofit SUGi—opened on 
Roosevelt Island. Named the Manhattan Healing Forest, it 
features roughly 1,500 trees and 47 native species, creat -
ing a new habitat for wildlife in a compact footprint.28
Advocates see this as a model for broader application. 
“These pocket forests should be everywhere,” says Christina 
Delfico, founder of iDig2Learn, which helps manage and 
program the Manhattan Healing Forest. “This is green  
acupuncture for the city . . . any bare spot that is underutilized, 
pop in a forest.” Similar approaches could extend to street 
medians, underutilized parcels across the five boroughs, 
and even Times Square.
Every Kid Outdoors initiative 
expands youth access to nature  
at a national scale (United States).
The federal “Every Kid Outdoors” initiative provides free  
access to national parks for fourth graders and their families, 
reaching hundreds of thousands of participants each year. 
The program has significantly expanded access, with roughly 
three-quarters of participants reporting they would not have 
visited otherwise.29
While New York City’s natural areas are already free, 
advocates argue that a similarly ambitious, citywide initia -
tive could help connect more young people to nature early in 
life. “New York City has nothing like this,” says Carta of the 
Jamaica Bay-Rockaway Parks Conservancy. “There needs to 
be an incentivized and funded tie-in to get more students 
out of the classroom and into parks.”
Policy Idea: Bring nature closer to where New Yorkers live with  
“Rewild NYC”
TO CLOSE PHYSICAL PROXIMITY GAPS WHEN IT COMES TO NATURAL AREAS, NEW YORK CITY COULD LAUNCH  
a bold interagency initiative—“Rewild NYC”—to expand access through pocket forests, native plantings, and micro-  
natural spaces. This could include transforming vacant lots, dead-end streets, and roadway medians; expanding 
Greenstreets; and incorporating natural elements into schools, libraries, and public housing. These smaller-scale 
interventions can bring meaningful environmental and public health benefits to neighborhoods that currently lack 
access. The proposed “NYC Youth Conservation Corps” could help maintain and steward these newly greened spaces, 
giving young New Yorkers paid, hands-on experience while ensuring these investments are cared for over time.
As cities around the world are experimenting with ways to integrate natural systems into the urban fabric, the 
benefits of nature—cooling, biodiversity, mental health—can be delivered through smaller, distributed interventions 
to bring nature closer to where New Yorkers live. Such initiatives are especially important given that a quarter of New 
Yorkers live in neighborhoods without access to natural areas, and creating large new parks is often impractical in 
dense parts of the city.
20
NEW YORK CITY’S FIVE BOROUGHS ARE TEEMING WITH  
wild places, from the wetlands near Orchard Beach in the Bronx 
to the forests of Staten Island’s Greenbelt. Yet too many 
New Yorkers remain cut off from these vital connections,  
especially in low-income communities, where transportation 
barriers, limited programming, and safety concerns make 
these spaces feel much farther away than they are.
Expanding access to nature can be a relatively low-cost 
way to improve public health, strengthen communities, and 
build climate resilience, but it will require greater focus,  
coordination, investment, and creativity. By better under -
standing both the challenges and opportunities that city 
leaders face when it comes to unlocking this potential—as 
well as the most promising ideas grounded in fact-based  
research—New York City can make new strides in harnessing 
the full potential of the city’s natural areas to improve the 
lives of all New Yorkers.
Conclusion
Young adults examining marine wildlife in Jamaica Bay 
(Jamaica Bay-Rockaway Parks Conservancy).
21
HARNESSING NYC’S NATURAL AREAS
Endnotes
1.  Natural Areas Conservancy, “NYC Nature Map,” 2024, 
https://naturalareasnyc.org/nyc-nature-map/.
2.  Center for an Urban Future analysis of programming data 
provided to CUF by program providers, and participant 
numbers taken from each organization’s website. 2026.
3.  United States Forest Service, “Reading the Landscape: 
A Social Assessment of Parks and Their Natural Areas in 
Jamaica Bay Communities,” 2015,  
https://www.nycgovparks.org/pagefiles/207/wp1-Jamai-
caBaySSA2013__6818c167610da.pdf.
4.  Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from the 
Natural Areas Conservancy and Census Block Maps.
5.  Natural Areas Conservancy, Funding Forested  
Natural Areas: Recent Trends in New York City, 
2023, https://naturalareasnyc.org/wp-content/up-
loads/2024/01/NAC-Funding-Forested-Natural-Areas.pdf.
6. The City of New York, Mayor’s Management Report, 2025, 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/operations/downloads/pdf/
mmr2025/2025_mmr.pdf.
7.  Marcia P. Jimenez et al., “Associations between Nature 
Exposure and Health: A Review of the Evidence,” 
 International Journal of Environmental Research  
and Public Health 18, no. 9 (2021): 4790,  
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18094790.
8.  New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, 
“Suicide-related factors among New York City Public High 
School Students,” Epi Data Brief, no 138 (November 
2023), https://www.nyc.gov/assets/doh/downloads/
pdf/epi/databrief138.pdf.
9.  Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from the 
Natural Areas Conservancy and Census Block Maps.
10.  Center for an Urban Future analysis of programming data 
provided to Center for an Urban Future by youth program 
providers, and participant numbers taken from each organi-
zation’s website. 2026. 
11.  Rebekah L. Coley, Dana C. McCoy, and Sarah F. Hatch, 
“How Poverty Shapes Children’s Home, Neighborhood, 
and School Environments: An Integrative Conceptual 
Framework and Review,” American Psychologist, advance 
online publication (2025),  
https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/amp0001573.
12.  Natural Areas Conservancy, “NYC’s Forests, 10 Years Later: 
4 Early Takeaways from Our Second Forest Assessment,” 
2025, https://naturalareasnyc.org/nycs-forests-10-years-
later-4-early-takeaways-from-our-second-forest-assessment/.
13.  Rebuild by Design, “NYC Parks as Climate Infrastructure,” 
2025, https://rebuildbydesign.org/nyc-parks-as-cli-
mate-infrastructure/.
14.  Natural Areas Conservancy, Funding Forested  
Natural Areas: Recent Trends in New York City, 2023,  
https://naturalareasnyc.org/wp-content/up-
loads/2024/01/NAC-Funding-Forested-Natural-Areas.pdf.
15.  Natural Areas Conservancy, “NYC Nature Map,” 2024, 
https://naturalareasnyc.org/nyc-nature-map.
16.  New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, 
“Ambient Noise Disruption in New York City,” Epi Data 
Brief, no. 45 (April 2014), https://www.nyc.gov/assets/
doh/downloads/pdf/epi/databrief45.pdf.
17.  Anna Gu, Hira Shafeeq, Ting Chen, and Preety Gadhoke, 
“Factors Associated with COVID-19 Infection, Hospi-
talization and Death in New York City Neighborhoods,” 
Innovations in Pharmacy 12, no. 3 (2021),  
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9120001.
18.  New York City Outward Bound Schools,  
“Impact & Reports,” https://www.outwardbound.org/
nycobs/about-our-school/impact-reports.
19.  Center for an Urban Future analysis of data from NYC Parks.
20.  Mayor’s Office of Climate and Environmental Justice, NYC 
Urban Forest Plan, 2026, https://report.urbanforestplan.
nyc/NYC-Urban-Forest-Plan-2026.pdf.
21.  New York City Department of Transportation,  
NYC Greenway Plan, 2025, https://www.nyc.gov/html/
dot/downloads/pdf/greater-greenways.pdf.
22.  Center for an Urban Future expert interviews.
23.  New York City Public Schools, “Sustainability,”  
https://www.schools.nyc.gov/school-life/space-and-facili-
ties/sustainability.
24.  Forest for All, “Learning and Growing: Urban Forestry 
Workforce Training in NYC,” 2023,  
https://forestforall.nyc/wp-content/uploads/2023/08/
LearningAndGrowing_report_FINAL_web.pdf.
25.  Center for an Urban Future analysis of enrollment data 
provided to CUF by workforce development providers, 
and participant numbers taken from each organization’s 
website. 2026.
26.  CUF analysis of employment data provided to Center  
for an Urban Future by natural areas organizations, and 
employee numbers taken from each organization’s  
website. 2026. 
27.  New York City Parks Department, “Hiking in NYC Parks,” 
https://www.nycgovparks.org/places-to-go/hiking.
28.  Aliya Uteuova, “The Big Apple Gets a Tiny Forest: 1,000 
Native Plants Coming to New York,” The Guardian, 2024, 
https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2024/mar/14/
tiny-forest-roosevelt-island-new-york.
29.  Every Kid Outdoors, “Every Kid Outdoors 2022–2023 
Report,” 2023, https://everykidoutdoors.gov/me-
dia/2022-2023_Every_Kid_Outdoors_Report_v2.pdf.
